4Volume 1someone different and strange, who can only be loosely identiﬁed with the personwe once knew. So strong is the presence of time on these pages that we respondwith a hunger for directness, a desire to live, and even an imperfect fulﬁllment. Butit is as if this life were behind glass—removed—everything is as if it were no longerours, as if it were being seen from a train.If only one could hear a real voice in this kingdom of passing ﬁction! No—you hear either the echoes of ﬁfteen years ago, or the rehearsed songs. The press inPoland, singing on the obligatory note, is as silent as a tombstone, an abyss, a secret,and the émigré Polish press is—charitable. Undoubtedly our spirit has becomemore kindly in emigration. The émigré press reminds me of a hospital where thepatients are given only soups that are easily digested. Why open wounds? Why addmore rawness to the wound life has already afﬂicted upon us and, after all, shouldn’twe behave politely now that we have gotten spanked? Nothing but Christian good-ness, decency, temperance, common sense, and virtue reign here so that everythingthat is written is nothing if not charitable. So many virtues! We were not this virtuouswhen we were surer of our ground. I do not trust virtue in those who have failed,virtue born of poverty and this entire morality remind me of Nietzsche’s words:‘‘The mitigation of our customs is the consequence of our weakness.’’In contrast to the voice of the emigration, the voice from Poland resoundssharply and categorically, so much so that it is difﬁcult to believe that this is not thevoice of truth and life. Here at least we know what’s going on, black and white,good and evil, here morality rings loud and strikes like a club. This singing wouldbe magniﬁcent if the singers were not terriﬁed of it and if one did not sense thetremor in their voices, which arouses pity. . . . In the immense silence, our uncon-fessed, mute and gagged reality takes shape.
Thursday
Cracow. Statues and palaces, which seem quite splendid to them but whichto us, Italians, seem without great value. Galeazzo Ciano, Diary
Lecho ´n’s article entitled ‘‘Polish Literature and Literature in Poland’’ inWiadomo´ sci.19535Is this really an honest piece of writing? His statements purport to showonce again (yes, again!) that we are equal to the greatest world literatures, exceptthat we are unknown and unappreciated. He writes (or says, rather, as this was alecture given in New York for the local Polonia):‘‘Because our men of letters were preoccupied chieﬂy with things Polish,they could not fulﬁll the mission of designating the right place for our literature inthe ranks of other literatures, or of establishing the world standing of our master-pieces. . . . Only a great poet, a master in his own language . . . could give hiscountrymen an idea of the level of our poets, equal to the greatest in the world, andcould convince them that this poetry is of the same mettle, of the same ﬁneness asthe poetry of Dante, Racine, and Shakespeare.’’And so on. Of the same mettle? Lecho ´ n was probably not too convincing.Because it is exactly the material of our literature which is different. To compareMickiewicz to Dante or to Shakespeare is to compare fruit to preserves, a naturalproduct to a processed one; a meadow, ﬁeld, or village to a cathedral or city; anidyllic soul to an urban one which is rooted in people, not in nature, which isloaded with knowledge about the world of the human race. Was Mickiewicz lessgreat than Dante? If we have to give ourselves up to these gauges, let us say that helooked at the world from gentle Polish slopes while Dante was elevated to the peakof a mighty mountain (made of people), from which he had access to otherperspectives. Dante, while not being perhaps ‘‘greater,’’ was poised higher: this iswhy he has the advantage.But that matters little. What I had in mind was the old-fashioned methodand the endless repetition of this uplifting style. When Lecho ´ n mentions, withpride, that Lautréamont ‘‘cites Mickiewicz,’’ my weary mind recalls, oh, how manyother such revelations. How many times did this person or that, be it Grzyma™a orD˛ebicki, demonstrate urbi et orbi that we are not upstarts because ‘‘Thomas Mannconsidered The Undivine Comedy* a great work’’ or because ‘‘Quo Vadis has beentranslated into all the major languages of the world.’’ These are the confections wefeast on.I would like to see the moment when the horse of the nation clamps itsteeth down on the sweet hand of all the Lecho ´ ns.
*Romantic drama written in 1833 by Zygmunt Krasi ´ nski.6Volume 1I understand Lecho ´ n and what he was trying to do. This is, of course, ourpatriotic duty, considering the historical moment in our forced exile. This is therole of the Polish writer. And furthermore, he probably does believe in what hewrites to a degree. I say ‘‘to a degree’’ because these are truths of a category thatdemands a great deal of good will. And, naturally, as far as ‘‘constructivism’’ goes,his appearance was entirely constructive and one hundred percent positive.Fine. But my attitude toward these matters is different. I once happened totake part in a meeting devoted to yet another mutual Polish cheering up andsupport session, when, after having sung the Rota* and having danced the Kra-kowiaczek,† everyone settled down to listen to the speaker, who extolled the nationbecause ‘‘we produced Chopin,’’ ‘‘we have Curie-Sk™odowska, Wawel,‡ S™owacki,Mickiewicz, and because we also ﬁgured as a bulwark of Christianity and ourThird of May Constitution was really quite progressive. . . . The man explained tohimself and to his audience that we are a great nation, which perhaps no longerarouses the enthusiasm of the listeners (who were familiar with this ritual andparticipated in it as in a Mass, where one does not expect surprises) but it was,nevertheless, received with something like satisfaction that one’s patriotic duty hadbeen fulﬁlled. But I felt this ritual as if it were born of hell, this national Massbecame something satanically sneering and maliciously grostesque. For they, inelevating Mickiewicz, were denigrating themselves and with their praise ofChopin showed that they had not yet sufﬁciently matured to appreciate him andthat by basking in their own culture, they were simply baring their primitiveness.Geniuses! The devil take those geniuses! I felt like saying to those gathered:Who cares about Mickiewicz? You are more important to me than Mickiewicz!And neither I nor anyone else will be judging the Polish nation according toMickiewicz or Chopin, but according to that which goes on and which is said herein this hall. You could be a nation so devoid of greatness that your greatest artistmight be Tetmajer or Konopnicka, yet if you talked about them with the ease ofpeople spiritually liberated, with the proportion and sobriety of a mature people, or
*Traditional hymn sung at gatherings.†Folk dance native to the area around Cracow.‡Hill where the Royal Castle, seat of the old capital of Poland, is located.19537if your words could encompass the horizon of not some poor backwater but theworld . . . then even Tetmajer would be cause for pride. But as things stand,Chopin and Mickiewicz serve only to emphasize your own narrow-mindedness,because, with the naïveté of children, you prance out your polonaises under thenoses of a bored foreign audience just so you can strengthen the impaired sense ofyour own worth and endow yourselves with meaning. You are like the poor wretchwho claims that his grandmother had a large estate and traveled to Paris. You arethe poor relations of the world, who try to impress themselves and others.This was not, however, the worst, most humiliating, or most painful aspectof the ritual. The most terrible thing was that life and modern minds were beingsacriﬁced to the deceased. For this ceremony could be described as the mutualblunting of Poles in the name of Mickiewicz . . . and not one of those present was asunintelligent as that gathering, which constituted and belched a feeble, preten-tious, and false phraseology. Yet the gathering knew it was unintelligent—unintelli-gent because it undertook issues which it had not mastered intellectually or emo-tionally. This is the source of the respect, the eager humility exhibited towardphraseology, the admiration for Art, the conventional and learned language, thelack of integrity and honesty. Here they were reciting. The gathering was alsomarked by inhibition, artiﬁciality, and falseness because Poland was taking part inthe meeting and a Pole does not know how to act toward Poland, it confuses himand makes him mannered. Poland inhibits the Pole to such a degree that nothingreally ‘‘works’’ for him. Poland forces him into a cramped state—he wants to help ittoo much, he wants to elevate it too much. Observe that Poles act normally andcorrectly toward God (in church), but toward Poland they lose themselves. Thismeans there is something here with which they are not yet comfortable.I recall a tea in one Argentine home, where my acquaintance, a Pole,began to speak about Poland. Again, naturally, Mickiewicz and Ko´ sciuszko to-gether with Sobieski and the Siege of Vienna came riding onto the table. Theforeigners listened politely to these passionate opinions and heard that ‘‘Nietzscheand Dostoevski were of Polish extraction,’’ and that ‘‘we have two Nobel prizes inliterature.’’ It occurred to me then that if someone were to praise himself or hisfamily in this way, it would be considered quite tactless. I thought that this auctionwith other nations for geniuses and heroes, for merits and cultural achievements,8Volume 1was really quite awkward from the point of view of propaganda tactics because withour half-French Chopin and not quite native Copernicus, we cannot competewith the Italians, French, Germans, English, or Russians. Therefore, it is exactlythis approach that condemns us to inferiority. The foreigners, however, continuedto listen patiently, as one listens to those who, pretending to the aristocracy, remindus over and over again that their great-great-grandfather was a castellan. Theylistened to this with all the greater boredom because it didn’t interest them in theleast because they themselves, constituting a young nation deprived, fortunately, ofgeniuses, were out of the running. Yet they listened indulgently and even sympa-thetically, because they could really sympathize with the psychological predica-ment of del pobre polaco. The Pole, on the other hand, enthralled by his role,would not stop.Yet my situation as a Polish writer was becoming more and more scabrous.I am not eager in the least to represent anything beyond my own person: neverthe-less, the world imposes these representative functions upon us against our will andit is not my fault that for these Argentines I was a representative of modern Polishliterature. Therefore, I had a choice: ratify that style, the style of the poor relation,or destroy it, which destruction would have to take place at the cost of all the moreor less ﬂattering and positive information that had been imparted and the wholeprocess would certainly be detrimental to our Polish interests. And it was, ofcourse, nothing else but a regard for our national dignity that allowed me nocalculations for I am a man with a distinctly heightened sense of personal dignityand such a man, even if he were not bound to his nation by bonds of commonpatriotism, will always maintain the dignity of his nation if only because he cannottear himself away and is a Pole in the eyes of the world. That is why any humiliationof the nation humiliates him personally before others. These feelings, somewhatforced and independent of us, are a hundred times stronger than all learned andpat sentiments.When we are overcome by a feeling such as this one, which is stronger thanwe are, we act somewhat blindly and these moments are extremely important forthe artist, because it is then that form’s bases of attack take shape and a positiontoward a burning issue is delineated. What did I say? I realized that only a radicalchange of tone could bring liberation. I tried, therefore, to indicate condescensionin my voice and began to speak as one who attaches no great importance to the19539attainments of the nation, whose past is worth a great deal less than its future, anation for whom the highest law is the law of the present, the law of maximumspiritual freedom at a given moment. Pointing to the foreign elements in the bloodof the Chopins, Mickiewiczes, Copernicuses (so that they would not think that Ihave anything to hide or that anything at all could take away my freedom ofmaneuver), I said that one should not take too seriously the metaphor that we,Poles, ‘‘gave’’ these people to the world as they were merely born among us. Whatdoes Mr. Kowalski have in common with Chopin? Does Chopin’s composition ofthe ballads raise Mr. Kowalski’s speciﬁc weight by even one iota? Can the Siege ofVienna augment Mr. Zi˛ ebicki of Radom by even an ounce of glory? No. We arenot, I said, the direct heirs of past greatness or insigniﬁcance, intelligence orstupidity, virtue or sin and each person is responsible only for himself. Each ishimself.Here, however, I had the impression that I was not being adequately pro-found and that I had to speak more sweepingly (if what I was saying was to beeffective). In admitting, therefore, up to a point, that certain speciﬁc virtues andthe tensions, energies, charms, which are born in a mass and constitute its expres-sion, do emerge in the great achievements of a nation, in the works of its artists. Istruck at the very basis of national self-adulation. I said that if a nation truly matureshould judge its own merits with temperance, then a nation truly vital must learnto disregard them. It must be absolutely condescending in relation to everythingthat is not its immediate concern and its current becoming. . . .‘‘Destruction’’ or ‘‘construction’’? One thing is certain: these words wereexplosive to the degree that they undermined the diligent ‘‘propaganda’’ ediﬁceand perhaps even shocked the foreigners in attendance. What a delight: to speaknot for someone else but for oneself! When each word ﬁxes you more ﬁrmly inyourself, lends you an inner strength, liberates you from a thousand fearful calcula-tions, when you do not speak as a slave of effect, but as a free man!Et quasi cursores, vitae lampada tradunt.It was not until the very end of my philippic that I discovered the thought,which in that atmosphere of muddled improvisation seemed most excellent.Namely, that nothing that is really your own can impress you. If, therefore, ourgreatness or our past impresses us, it is proof that it has not yet entered ourbloodstream.10Volume 1Friday
The most characteristic part of Wiadomo´ sci are the letters from readers.‘‘Dear Editor: In the last issue, Zbyszewski is half-baked, as always; Mack-iewicz lacks perspective; but that Naglerowa: delicious!—Felix Z.’’‘‘Dear Editor: ‘‘It’s too bad that our writers work on themselves so little,good material, but unpolished, only Hemar is a real European. Keep working atit!—Joseph B.’’‘‘Dear Editor: In my last letter I wrote that Roman is better than ˙Zeromski. I will now say that he is the best, damn you, Roman, for that last feat, now that was agem!!!!! Keep it up! Kiss your children for me!—Konstanty F.’’A friendly little corner! A corner where Vincent can air his moans andValerian can express his outrage and Frances can show off her erudition. What’swrong with that? Nothing really, nothing at all. This is how literature is popu-larized, that’s all, this is how enlightenment is disseminated.Yet this whooping it up in the corners by people who have not earned theright to ﬁgure in a different, less friendly spot, well, I have to say, this cozinessdisgusts me. Literature is a lady of strict habits and one should not go aroundpinching her in the corners. A characteristic of literature is its acuity. Even aliterature that smiles good-naturedly to the reader is the product of the acute andsolid development of its creator. Literature has to aspire to hone a spiritual life andnot to tolerate this type of corner activity.This detail, meaningless in principle, is nevertheless characteristic, as itaccentuates the invasion of ﬂaccidity into an area which should be ﬁrm. Literature,which is constantly made ﬂabby by various kindhearted aunts who crank outnovels or feuilletons, by producers of mediocre prose and poetry, or by slugsendowed with a facility for writing, is in danger of becoming a soft-boiled egginstead of being a hard-boiled one, which is its vocation.
Saturday
From B.T.’s article in Wiadomo´ sci: ‘‘I will risk stating that Polish optimism,despite appearances, is a result of pure intellectual laziness. Whenever the situa-tion becomes difﬁcult, we always resort to the tradition of ‘raising our spirits.’ ’’195311Next to this, on the same page, in W. Gr.’s article: ‘‘We are beginning to for-get that the greatness of literature depends on its sovereignty. . . . Art serves no one.’’Heatwave. My fatigue refuses to read on . . . yet these phrases are troubling.I could endorse them myself because they are so close to me in content. Yet, it isexactly because they are close to me in content that they become disturbinglyhostile. Exactly because the content comes from someone else, is the result ofother worlds, a different stylistic and spiritual background. It is enough for me toread one of the next sentences written by W. Gr.:‘‘The Fop Goes A-Courting* is real literature . . . a self-sufﬁcient bauble, justas a healthy man in cheerful sunshine or breezy shade is a self-sufﬁcient bauble. . . .’’It is exactly this combination of bauble-health, matching what I knowabout this author from his other work, that repels me and makes his statementunsavory. How much depends on whose lips utter an opinion that is ours and thatwe support. I think that certain ideas in Poland have always lacked the rightpeople. By this I mean that the people were not in a position to guarantee the ideasnot only enough strength, but also that magnetic attraction that a ‘‘well-turned’’soul wields. What is even stranger is that we had an exceptional number of noble,and even lofty, writers. Yet the personality of a ˙Zeromski, Prus, Norwid, even Mickiewicz, was incapable of rousing (at least in me) the trust that ﬁlls Montaigneto the brim. It looks as if our writers hid something in themselves along the roadof their development and, as a consequence of that concealment, were incapableof a comprehensive honesty, as if their virtue could not look all varieties of sin inthe face.The sentences cited above disturb me for another reason, too. The auto-didactic ‘‘we.’’ We Poles are such and such. This and that happens to us Poles. Ourweakness, the weakness we Poles share is this. This style is tiresome because it isprovincial, yet who of us does not lecture the people in this way? This is one ofthose stylistic traps that wait in ambush for the person writing and that, judgingfrom my own experience, are incredibly difﬁcult to avoid.As always, this stylistic slip is a symptom of a more serious ailment. The ﬂawin this conception is contained in the aphorism: medice, cura te ipsum. Of course,that ‘‘we’’ is a courtesy because here the author speaks as an educator, as he who
*Comedy in verse written in 1781 by Franciszek Zablocki.12Volume 1confronts us with Europe and pronounces deﬁciencies that pain him as well.Behind such a seemingly simple remark lurks quite a load of conceit, not to mentionthat the heavy pedagogy of such formulations is of the kind that comes too cheaply,too easily, something that anybody can afford simply by putting on the airs of a‘‘European.’’ Yet the main and fundamental root of this error reaches so profoundlyinto our depths that it is no mean feat to say to it once and for all: so long.How can I say this? It is a matter of energy and vitality. It is a matter of ourvery attitude toward life. Ah, at school Adam wondered what his weaknesses wereand how he could weed them out: he wanted to be pious like Zdzis™aw, practicallike Joey, smart like Henry, witty like Wacio . . . for which he was highly praised byhis teachers. But his classmates didn’t like him and gladly beat him up.
II
Monday
After a sixteen-hour, quite bearable (if it weren’t for the tangos that wereblaring out of the speaker!) bus ride from Buenos Aires—the green hills of Sal-sipuedes and I among them with Mi™osz’s book The Captive Mind under my arm.Because it poured all day yesterday, I am almost ﬁnished with the book. So youwere destined for this, this was your lot, your road, my old acquaintances, friends,companions from the Ziemia ´ nska or the Zodiak. I here, you there, that is how ithas been described and unmasked. Mi™osz tells the history of the bankruptcy ofliterature in Poland smoothly and I ride his book straight through that streamlinedcemetery, just as, two days ago, I rode the bus along the asphalt highway.Terrifying asphalt. It does not appall me that tempora mutantur, it appallsme that nos mutamur in illis. I am not aghast at the change in living conditions, thefall of states, the annihilation of cities and other surprise geysers, spurting out of thewomb of History, but the fact that a fellow whom I knew as X suddenly becomes Y,changes his personality like a jacket and begins to act, speak, think, and feelcontrary to himself ﬁlls me full of fear and embarrassment. What a terrible shame-lessness! What a ridiculous demise! To become a gramophone, onto which is put arecord with the label ‘‘His Master’s Voice’’? What a grotesque fate for these writers!195313Writers! We would save ourselves a great many disillusionments if we didnot call everyone who can ‘‘write,’’ ‘‘a writer.’’ I knew those ‘‘writers.’’ They wereusually persons of rather superﬁcial intelligence and quite narrow horizons who, asfar as I can remember, did not become anybody so that today they don’t really havemuch to give up. These cadavers were characterized in their lifetime by thefollowing: it was easy for them to fabricate a moral and ideological face, therebyearning the approbation of the critics and the more serious part of the readership. Idid not believe in Jerzy Andrzejewski’s Catholicism for even a second, and, afterreading a few pages of his novel, I greeted his suffering and spiritualized face in theCafé Zodiak with a face so doubtful that the offended author immediately broke offall relations with me.Both the Catholicism and the sufferings of the book were received withshouts of ‘‘hosanna’’ by the naive, who mistook a reheated hash for rare tenderloinsteak. The besotted nationalism of Ga™czy ´ nski, who was truly talented, was worthas much as the intellectualisms of the Wa˙ zyks, or the ideology of the group aroundProsto z Mostu.* In the Warsaw cafés, just as in the cafés all around the world, therewas a need for ‘‘idea and faith,’’ the result of which was that writers began to believein this thing or that overnight. As for me, I always considered this child’s play; and Ieven pretended that it amused me although deep inside, I was appalled at thisintroduction to the future Great Masquerade.All of this was cheap and no cheaper than, in the majority of cases, the cloy-ing humanity of various women, the poeticality of Tuwim and the Skamandrites,the inventions of the avant-garde, the murkiness of the aesthetic-philosophicalrampages of the Peipers, Brauns, and other manifestations of literary life.Spirit is born of the imitation of spirit and a writer must pretend to be awriter in order ﬁnally to become a writer. Prewar literature in Poland was, with fewexceptions, a fair imitation of literature, but that is all. Those people knew what agreat writer was supposed to be: ‘‘authentic,’’ ‘‘profound,’’ ‘‘constructive’’ and theythen tried to fulﬁll these requirements yet their game was spoiled by the awarenessthat it was not their own ‘‘profundity’’ and ‘‘loftiness’’ that was compelling them towrite, but the reverse: they were creating the profundity so that they could be
*Interwar publication, a Warsaw weekly, Straight from the Shoulder.14Volume 1writers. That is how this subtle blackmail of values came about and it was no longerclear whether someone was voicing humility only to elevate himself and stand out,or if that someone was voicing the bankruptcy of culture and literature in order tobe a good literary ﬁgure. The greater the hunger for real and pure value amongthese beings, so restricted by their own contradictions, the more desperate thefeeling of the inevitable and all-demanding kitsch. O those exhausted intelli-gences, those inﬂated heights, those subtleties dragged out by the hair, those soulssuffering, all this for a readership! There was only one means by which to get out ofthis hell: to disclose reality, bare the entire mechanism and loyally acknowledge theprimacy of the human over the divine. Yet it is exactly this that literature feared, andit wasn’t just our literature that feared it. None of the literati would admit it to theworld even though this was the only thing that could arm them with a new truthand honesty. This is the reason that prewar Polish literature was becoming moreand more of an imitation. Yet the virtuous little nation, which took its literatureseriously, was very surprised to see that its ‘‘top writers,’’ when pressed to the wall bythe historical moment, began to change their skin, easily absorbed the new faith,and even began to dance to the tune that was played for them. Writers! The point isprecisely that these were writers who would stop at nothing to be writers. They wereready to make the most heroic sacriﬁces in order to remain writers.I don’t at all claim that I would not have gone the same route if submittedto the same pressures as they, actually it would have been quite likely, but at least Iwouldn’t have made a fool of myself, like they did, because I was more honest inrelation to myself and those absolute values did not issue from my lips as profusely.Then, in the swarming and noisy coffeehouses of Warsaw, it was as if I had aforeboding of the day of confrontation, the revelation and baring, as a result ofwhich I preferred to avoid platitudes. Not everything is bankruptcy in that bank-ruptcy, however, and today, in Mi™osz’s book, I am inclined to look for new possi-bilities rather than signs of an ultimate catastrophe. The following question is whatinterests me: how far can these grim experiences assure the Eastern writers asuperiority over their Western counterparts?For it is certain that in their fall, they have an advantage in some specialway over the West, and in several instances Mi™osz underlines the power andwisdom that can result from that type of mendacity, terror, and consistent deforma-195315tion. Mi™osz himself is an illustration of this speciﬁc development, because hiscalm streamlined word, which watches what he describes with such mortal calm,has the ﬂavor of a speciﬁc maturity, somewhat different from that which blooms inthe West. I would say that in his book, Mi™osz is ﬁghting on two fronts: the point isnot only to condemn the East in the name of Western culture, but also to imposeone’s own distinct experience and one’s own new knowledge of the world—derivedfrom over there—on the West. This almost personal duel between a modern Polishwriter and the West, where the stakes are an exhibition of one’s own value, power,distinctness, is far more interesting to me than Mi™osz’s analysis of Communistissues, which, even though it is exceptionally penetrating, cannot introduce ele-ments that are entirely new.Mi™osz himself once said something like this: the difference between aWestern and East European intellectual is that the former has not had a good kickin the a— —. In keeping with the thought of this aphorism, our strong point (Iinclude myself in this) would be that we are representatives of a brutalized culture,that is, a culture that is close to life. Mi™osz himself knows the boundaries of thistruth, and it would be pitiful if our prestige were based exclusively on the bruisedquarter of our body. A bruised part of the body is not a part of the body in its normalstate, and philosophy, literature, and art must also serve people who have not hadtheir teeth knocked out, their eyes blackened, or their jaws broken. Nevertheless,look at Mi™osz and see how he tries to adjust his wildness to the demands ofWestern delicacy.Body and Spirit. It sometimes happens that bodily comforts intensify thesharpness of the soul and that, behind the still curtains, in the stuffy room of abourgeois, a severity is born that is completely alien to those who threw themselvesat tanks. Therefore, our brutalized culture can be of use only if it can be digested asa new form of real culture that is thought through and organized by our contribu-tion to the universal spirit.Question: Is Mi™osz, is a free Polish literature, capable of even partiallyfulﬁlling these demands?I am writing all of this in my room and I must stop as supper is waiting forme at the rooming house, Las Delicias. Farewell for now, little diary, faithful dog ofmy soul. Don’t howl—your master is leaving, it is true, but he will return.16Volume 1Wednesday
For a while (and, possibly, because of the monotony of my existence here),I have been overcome by a curiosity which I have never before experienced, acuriosity of such pure intensity, curiosity as to what will happen within the nextmoment. Right before me, a wall of darkness out of which springs the most directimmediacy, like a terrifying revelation. What will come around the corner? Aman? A dog? If it’s a dog, then what shape will it have, what pedigree? I sit at thetable and in a moment, my soup will arrive, but, what kind of soup? This very basicfeeling has not been adequately treated in art. Man—as an instrument transform-ing the unknown into the known—does not ﬁgure in the pantheon of its heroes.I have ﬁnished Mi™osz’s book.It is immeasurably instructive, stimulating, and shocking reading for all ofus Polish literati.I think about it almost nonstop when I am alone and I have to say thatMi™osz the defender of Western civilization interests me far less than Mi™osz theopponent and rival of the West. When he tries to be different from Western writersis when he is most valuable to me. I feel the same thing in him that I ﬁnd in myself:antipathy and condescension in relation to them, mixed with a bitter powerless-ness. Comparing Mi™osz with Claudel, for example, with Cocteau or even Valéry,leads to odd conclusions. It would seem that this Polish writer, this pal of Andrze-jewski and Ga™czy ´ nski, his habitué of the Ziemia ´ nska, dispenses a greater dose ofrealism and is more ‘‘modern,’’ and, what’s more, more free spiritually, more opento reality and more loyal to it. Furthermore, one has the impression that he is evenmore isolated and more, that he has cast off the remainder of the illusions thatWestern seers cling to (Valéry, although he was completely bereft of illusions, didnot stop being a man tied to a certain milieu and to a certain social order whileMi™osz has been completely thrown from the saddle). So one could say that abrutalized culture furnishes one with considerable advantages. Yet all of this is as ifit were unﬁnished, unarticulated, and unconsolidated and we lack, perhaps, theﬁnal consciousness that lends full distinction and power to our truth. We lack thekey to our riddle.How the indistinctness of our relationship to the West chafes! A Pole, whenconfronting the East, is a Pole delineated and known in advance. A Pole with his195317face turned toward the West has a turbid visage, full of unclean angers, disbelief,and secret sore spots.
Thursday
It is raining and is still quite cold. Because of this, I spent all day readingThe Brothers Karamazov in an excellent edition, which includes the author’s lettersand commentary.
Friday
The mail: R. sent me letters and periodicals, among them the latest issue ofKultura. I ﬁnd out that Mi™osz won the Prix Européen for a novel which I have notread: La prise du pouvoir.* In that same issue of Kultura are Mi™osz’s comments onThe Marriage and Trans-Atlantic.
Saturday
Most of the many letters that I am getting regarding Trans-Atlantic areneither an expression of protest—because of the ‘‘affront to the most sacred offeelings’’—nor a polemic, nor even a commentary. No. Only two mighty issuesconcern these readers: How dare I write certain words with capitals in the middleof a sentence? How dare I use the word sh— —?What am I supposed to think about the intellectual and other levels of aperson who does not yet know that a word changes depending on how it is used?That even the word ‘‘rose’’ can become less than sweet-smelling if it appears on thelips of a pretentious aesthete, and that the word ‘‘sh— —’’ can be considered genteelif it is used intentionally by a discipline conscious of its goals?But, no, they read literally. If a person uses lofty words, that person is noble.If he uses strong words, he is strong; if crude words, he is crude. And this dullliteralness reigns on even the highest rungs of society, so how then is one to dreamof a Polish literature on a more universal scale?
*Seizure of Power.18Volume 1Tuesday(two weeks later, after returning from Buenos Aires)
I received a letter from Mi™osz, who writes the following critique of Trans-Atlantic:
‘‘At the same time I would like to share with you my thoughts about yourwriting. There are times when I have the feeling that you act like Don Quixote,who lends a certain life to windmills and sheep. From a Polish perspective (thatis, from the perspective of the terrible thrashing which they got), the ‘Poles,’whom you try to free from Polishness, are poor shadows with an unusually lowdegree of being. In other words, you sometimes act as if that entire horrifyinglyeffective liquidation there in Poland had not happened, as if Poland had beenswept away by a lunar catastrophe and you come along with your revulsion toan immature, provincial Poland from before 1939. Perhaps this settling ofaccounts is needed and even necessary, but in my view, this has already beendone quite categorically. Many issues have already been settled this way. This isa difﬁcult problem, which is based on the fact that Marxism eliminates certainproblems (by the same principle that the blowing up of a city eliminates maritalquarrels, concerns about the furniture, etc.).‘‘There is a nihilistic trap here and we are poised somewhere be-tween the desire to speak to people in Poland, that is, to create a post-Marxistformation (which must digest and engulf Marxism) and the entirely per-sonal desire for independent thought (which cannot take the climate overthere, in conquered countries, into consideration but which, nonetheless,changes the past as well as the future). When I read your work, I always thinkof this. . . .’’
To which I answered:
‘‘Dear Czes™aw:‘‘If I understand you correctly, you have two reservations about Trans-Atlantic: ﬁrst that I am settling accounts with a pre-1939 Poland, which hasvanished into thin air, and that thereby I avoid today’s Poland, the real Poland.That my thoughts, like a cat, stray too much along their own paths, that I havemy own world, which seems chimerical or outdated.195319‘‘Yet, as you correctly observe, you judge this issue from the perspectiveof the homeland while I cannot see the world in any other way except from myown perspective.‘‘To introduce a certain amount of order into my feelings, I decidedquite a while ago that I would write only about my own reality. I cannot writeabout Poland as it is today because I do not know it. This ‘memoir,’ that is,Trans-Atlantic, concerns my experiences before 1939 in the face of the Polishcatastrophe of that time.‘‘Can this settling of accounts with Poland be important for today’sPoland? You mention Don Quixote in your letter and I think to myself thatCervantes wrote Don Quixote to settle accounts with the bad knighthoodromances of his time, of which not a single tract has survived while Quixote has.From which humbler authors can derive the moral that one can write in alasting way about things that are nonlasting.‘‘Even though Trans-Atlantic uses pre-1939 Poland, it is aiming at allPolish presents and futures, where the point is victory over national form as suchand an elaboration of distance to any kind of ‘Polish style,’ whatever it may be.Today, Poles in Poland are subjected to a certain ‘Polish style,’ born there underthe pressure of their new collective life. In a hundred years, if we are still anation, other forms will emanate from among us and my future grandchild willrebel against them just as I am rebelling today.‘‘I attack Polish form because it is my form, because all of my worksdesire to be, in a certain sense (certain because this is only one of the senses ofmy nonsense), a revision of the modern man in relation to form, to form which isnot a result of him but which is formed ‘between’ people. I do not need to tell youthat this thought, together with all of its ramiﬁcations, is a child of our times,when people have intentionally set out to remake man. It even seems to me thatit is the key to understanding today’s consciousness.‘‘Yet even though there is nothing that appalls me more than anachro-nism, I prefer not to identify too much with the slogans of the present day, whichchange rapidly. I feel that art should maintain a distance from slogans and lookfor its own, more personal, paths. In works of art I like the mysterious deviationthe best, the deviation that causes that a work, even while adhering to its epoch,nevertheless is the work of a separate individual who lives his own life. . . .’’20Volume 1I include this exchange of letters to let the reader in on the conversations ofwriters like Mi™osz and myself who search for a certain line in writing, each in hisown way. I must add a few comments though. My letter to Mi™osz would have beena great deal more honest and complete if I had included this truth in it: that I reallydon’t care all that much about these theses, ways, and problems and that I occupymyself with them against my will. Basically, I am childish. Is Mi™osz, too, primarilychildish?
Wednesday
Mi™osz is a ﬁrst-rate force. This is a writer with a clearly deﬁned purpose,called to quicken our pulse so that we can keep up with the epoch. He has amagniﬁcent talent, ﬁnely tuned to complete his tasks. He possesses something thatis worth its weight in gold, something that I would call a ‘‘will to reality’’ and, at thesame time, a sensitivity to the crucial points of our crisis. He belongs to those fewwhose words have meaning (the only thing that can undermine him is haste).This writer, however, has currently transformed himself into an expert onPoland and Communism. Just as I distinguished between an Eastern Mi™osz and aWestern one, now perhaps I should also make a distinction between Mi™osz the‘‘absolute’’ writer and Mi™osz the writer of the immediate historical moment. It isprecisely the Western Mi™osz (the one who in the name of the West, judges theEast) that is the Mi™osz of a lesser, more topical, caliber. One could accuse thisWestern Mi™osz of many things that pertain to that entire section of today’s litera-ture that lives off of just one problem: Communism.The ﬁrst reproach is: they exaggerate. Not in the sense that they magnifythe danger, but in the sense that they impute certain demonic traits to that world,some type of extraordinariness, something new and shocking. This approach issimply not reconcilable with maturity, which, in knowing the essence of life, doesnot allow itself to be surprised by its events. Revolutions, wars, cataclysms—whatdoes this foam mean when compared to the fundamental horror of existence? Yousay there has been nothing like it before? You forget that in the nearest hospital nolesser atrocities take place. You say that millions are dying? You forget that millionshave been dying, incessantly, without a moment’s respite, since the beginning of195321time. You are horriﬁed and dumbfounded by that horror because your imaginationhas fallen asleep and you forget that we rub up against hell with our every step.This is important because Communism can be judged effectively onlyfrom the perspective of the most severe and profound sense of existence, neverfrom a point of view that is superﬁcial and subdued, never from a bourgeois pointof view. You get carried away by the desire (appropriate to artists) to paint thepicture in brighter colors, to lend it as much expression as possible. That is whyyour literature is a magniﬁcation of Communism and in your imagination youbuild a phenomenon that is so powerful and so extraordinary that it doesn’t takemuch more for you to fall to your knees before it.Therefore, I ask you: wouldn’t it be more in keeping with history and withour knowledge of man and the world if you treated the world from behind thecurtain not as a new, incredible, and demonic world but as a devastation anddistortion of a normal world? If you maintained the right proportion between theconvulsions of a destroyed surface and the unrelenting, powerful, and profoundlife that continues beneath it?And the second reproach: by reducing everything to that one antinomybetween East and West, you must inevitably conform to patterns that you yourselfcreate. And even more so because there is no way to make the distinction betweenwhat is the quest for truth in you and what a desire for psychological mobilizationin the battle. I don’t mean to say that you cultivate propaganda. I want to say thatdeep collective instincts, that today dictate to humanity that it should concentrateon just one struggle, are speaking through you. You swim with the current of themass imagination, which has already created its own language, ideas, images, andmyths, and the current is carrying you farther than you would like to go. Howmuch Orwell is there in Mi™osz? How much Koestler is there in Orwell? Howmuch of both of them is in the thousands upon thousands of words uttered on thatone subject and produced by printing presses day after day, which is not due to theAmerican dollar but is the result of our very nature, which desires a sharply deﬁnedworld for itself? In you, the boundlessness and richness of life are reduced to a fewissues, and you use an oversimpliﬁed concept of the world, a concept you wellknow is provisional.Why, the value of pure art is exactly in its breaking up of these set patterns.22Volume 1The third reproach is even more painful. Whom do you wish to serve, theindividual or the masses? Communism is something that subordinates man to ahuman collectivity, from which one should conclude that the best way to ﬁghtCommunism is to strengthen the individual against the masses. Since it is obviousthat politics, the press, and topical literature, calculated for practical effect, desireto create a collective force capable of battling the Soviets, the task before serious artis quite different. Serious art will either remain what it has been for centuries—thevoice of the individual, the medium of man in the singular—or it will perish. Fromthis standpoint, one page of Montaigne, a single Verlaine poem, or one sentenceby Proust is far more anti-Communist than the accusing choir which you repre-sent. They are free and therefore they are liberating.And last, the fourth reproach: genuinely ambitious art (these reproachesare directed only at creators with high aspirations, at those who do not deny thename of artists) must be in advance of its time, it must be the art of tomorrow. Howis one to reconcile this wonderful task with reality, that is, with today? Artists areproud that recent years have expanded their perception of man. By comparison,more recently deceased authors appear naive. Yet all of these truths and half-truthswere given to them just so they could surmount them to discover others lurkingbeneath. Art must destroy today’s ideas in the name of impending ones. But thoseimpending tastes, tomorrow’s issues, the awaiting spiritual states, concepts, feel-ings: how can they be born under a pen that strives only to consolidate today’svision, today’s contradictions? The observations that Mi™osz published in Kulturaabout my play are a good illustration of this. He saw what was ‘‘timely’’ in TheMarriage, the despair and the moan that result from the degradation of humandignity and the violent crash of civilization, but he did not notice how far delightand play—which are ready to raise man above his own defeats at a moment’snotice—hide behind that facade of today!Gradually we are becoming sated with today’s feelings. Our symphony isgetting close to the moment when the baritone rises and sings: brothers, cast offyour songs; let other tones resound! The song of the future, however, will not beborn under a pen that is excessively tied to the present time.It would be stupid if I harbored ill feelings toward people who, uponseeing a ﬁre, sound the alarm. Such are not my intentions. Yet I am saying: leteach person do what he was called to do and what he is capable of doing. Literature195323of a high caliber must aim high and concern itself chieﬂy with not allowinganything to impede its range. If you want a projectile to soar, you must point thebarrel upward.
Friday
A new issue of Wiadomo´ sci and in it my ‘‘Banquet.’’ And a ﬂattering articleabout Mi™osz. I read: ‘‘The Captive Mind is a great deﬂating of émigré literature.’’And further: ‘‘Certain chapters of Mi™osz, more than anything else that I know, re-mind me most of Proust, except that they are better than Proust.’’ Further down, thispassage: ‘‘The remaining chapters—those historico-economico-philosophical theo-ries clearly are beyond the author’s level of knowledge. They are well-articulatedaphorisms which lack a scientiﬁc and informed base: the pretensions of this bookrise well above its real worth.’’I am afraid that the aspirations of this review rise well above its real worth. Ifémigré literature still needs to be ‘‘deﬂated’’ and if that is to be Mi™osz’s greatestservice, then it is better not to mention Proust at all, who, for whatever it is worth,had less elementary problems on his mind. The very comparison of Mi™osz toProust is enough to make the reader go stark raving mad and utter: So what doesthis have to do with the price of tea in China? What does a weather vane have incommon with a cock?But this is not so important. Truly noteworthy is the third fragment I cited.Mr. Mackiewicz: Who of the literati, who of the educated, which of the wise menpossess in full these ‘‘basics of science and knowledge’’? Isn’t it true that ourlibraries have outgrown our capabilities, that we are all ignoramuses more or lessand that the only thing we have left is to wield the amount of knowledge that we dohave with good will? You mean to tell me that a man of unusual intelligence suchas Mi™osz has no right to simply tell us his most personal experiences, nor to seekthe truth in them that he is capable of seeking, without having someone say that heis pretentious, conceited, and ignorant? In the sixth grade I was a member of theDebating Club, and I recall that these were the deadliest of reproaches and all thedeadlier because, like a ball, they bounced back at you: it’s not I, but you that is aconceited ignoramus!And where did he get these historico-economico-philosophical theories24Volume 1that supposedly make up the greater part of the book? Really, people write just anyold thing in their reviews.My attitude to Wiadomo´ sci (and to Kultura) and to Stanis™aw Mackiewicz iscomplicated. I consider Wiadomo´ sci an excellent and uncommonly useful weeklyand I read Mackiewicz with the greatest pleasure (even when he irritates me) butthe crushing ease with which literary publicism dismisses literature arouses myresistance. There is something contained in the very nature of the literary press thatlodges in literature’s throat.
Thursday
Once I was explaining to someone that in order to feel the real cosmicsigniﬁcance of man for man, he should imagine the following:I am completely alone in a desert. I have never seen people nor do Iimagine that another man is even possible. At that very moment an analogouscreature appears in my ﬁeld of vision, which, while not being me, is neverthelessthe same principle in an alien body. Someone identical but alien nevertheless.And suddenly I experience, at precisely the same moment, a wondrous fulﬁllmentand a painful division. Yet one revelation stands out above all the rest: I havebecome boundless, unpredictable to myself, multiple in possibilities through thisalien, fresh but identical power, which approaches me as if I were approachingmyself from the outside.To ﬁnish with the reﬂections on Mi™osz: I try to understand what this keyidea could be, which our Eastern experience can contribute to the West and whatmodern Polish literature’s contribution can be to Western literature.I will undoubtedly conceive of this thing in rather subjective terms asthinking is not my specialty and I do not conceal the fact that to me thought is simplyauxiliary scaffolding. I would like only to indicate which strings are strummed bythat, our Eastern reality.To a believing Communist, the revolution appears to be a triumph ofintelligence, virtue, and truth, so that there is nothing in it that would deviate fromthe normal line of human progress. To a ‘‘pagan,’’ however, as Mi™osz says, ‘‘revolu-tion brings a different awareness,’’ which he grasps in the following sentence: thatman is capable of doing everything to another man.195325There is something in this which begins to separate us, Eastern literati,more or less from the West. (Notice how careful I am. I say ‘‘more or less’’ and‘‘begins.’’) In spite of everything, the West lives with a vision of isolated man andabsolute values. We, on the other hand, begin to see the formula: man plus man,man multiplied by man and that this should in no way be connected with any kindof collectivism. Buber, a Jewish philosopher, described this pretty well when hesaid that the individualist philosophy we have known up to now has done itself inand that the greatest disillusionment that awaits mankind in the near future is thebankruptcy of collectivist philosophy, which conceives of the individual as a func-tion of the masses but really subordinates it to such abstractions as social class,state, nation, and race. It will be on the corpses of these worldviews that the thirdvision of man will be born: man in relation to another man, a concrete man, I inrelation to you and him. . . .Man through man. Man in relation to man. Man created by man. Manstrengthened by man. Is it my illusion that I see in this a secret new reality? For inthinking about these misunderstandings that are springing up between us and theWest, I always stumble on the ‘‘other’’ man, raised to the category of a creativepower. This can be contained in twenty various deﬁnitions or expressed in 150 waysbut it will remain a fact. To us, sons of the East, the problem of individual con-science is beginning to melt in our hands while it is still fattening half of Frenchliterature, and Lady Macbeth and Dostoyevski become unbelievable. At least halfthe texts written by the various Mauriacs seem to have been written on the moon.We sense certain indigestible luxuries in the voices of Camus, Sartre, Gide, Valéry,Eliot, and Huxley, remnants of times which are over for us. These differencesbecome so sharp in practice that I, for example (and I say this without the leastexaggeration), am incapable of talking about art with artists because the West hasremained faithful to absolute values and still belives in art and the delights which itbrings us, while for me the delight is imposed, born between us. Where they see aman kneeling before Bach’s music, I see people who force each other to genuﬂectand feel delight and admiration. This vision of art must be reﬂected in my coexis-tence with it and I listen to a concert differently. I admire the great mastersdifferently and I judge poetry differently.And this is how it is with everything. If our sensibility has not yet launcheditself with enough force then it is because we are slaves of an inherited language,26Volume 1but it is forcing its way to the surface through the cracks of form with increasingstrength. What will be born, what can be born in Poland in the souls of a ruinedand brutalized people when one day (in the future) even the new order that hasstiﬂed the old disappears and nothing follows? Here’s a possible scenario: thedigniﬁed ediﬁce of a thousand-year-old civilization collapses. It is quiet and emptyand a swarm of ordinary little human beings, who cannot recover from the shock,stand on the ruins. Their church has fallen, along with the altars, paintings,stained-glass windows, and statues before which they knelt. The vaults that pro-tected them have long since changed into dust and rubble and they are revealed inall of their nakedness. Where should they take shelter? What should they worship?To whom should they pray? Whom should they fear? Where should they locate thesource of inspiration and strength? Would it be strange if they saw the only creativeforce and the only accessible Divinity in themselves? This is the way that leadsfrom the worship of human products to the discovery of man himself, as thedecisive and naked power.The inhabitants of the splendid ediﬁce that is Western civilization ought toprepare themselves for an invasion of homeless people with a new perception ofman . . . which will not take place. I have just changed my mind. If a Bulgariandoes not trust a Bulgarian, if a Bulgarian despises Bulgarians, if a Bulgarian takes aBulgarian for a . . . (here we have to use that famous deleted word), then we will notimpose our feeling on anyone else because we do not take our feelings seriously.And it would be too strange if this vision of man were to be born among peoplewho have nothing but contempt for one another.
Tuesday
Another view, this time in Orze™ Bia™y,* about Trans-Atlantic and TheMarriage. Jan Ostrowski. If I can’t understand a thing in these crippled, dishev-eled, unwashed, bellowing sentences, then what will others understand?
‘‘As usual, the avant-garde feelers of literature encounter a protruding ‘back-side,’ the most drastic things. Judging from his pronouncements, Gombrowicz’sconcerns depend on a revelation of partial perfection.’’
*The White Eagle.195327‘‘Gombrowicz has transformed himself from an importer of literarynovelties during the war to an exporter of Polish literary products.’’
Three columns of this sloppiness. Ostrowski is, as far as I know, the editor ofthe literary section of Orze™ Bia™y. It’s probably true: this article could only havebeen deemed ﬁt for print by the person who wrote it.Why does the captive mind of the editor poke and pinch my book whereverhe can? I looked for this secret and found it in the next sentence. ‘‘He deﬁledhimself and the entire emigration. . . . For the time being he gets a polemicalthrashing, doses of anaesthetic silence.’’ Mr. Ostrowski recognized that a polemicalthrashing is more effective, even though persons who do not know how to speakought to choose the anaesthetic silence. Silence on the subject of me, Mr. Os-trowski, would be more damning from lips capable only of stupidity.What should one do with the charming phenomenon of a writer of feuille-tons of Mr. Ostrowski’s type. A delightful ﬁgure, who demolishes viewpoints with afew words, teaches, uncovers truths, shapes, consolidates, forms, unmasks, con-structs, launches, orients. . . . He will even spice his feuilletons with God, but, Godor truth, God is not what he wants but to stick a needle into someone’s a— —. Whatgives him the authority to misuse God’s name in this way or to exploit so manyserious names to stuff his article and exploit the good faith of his readers? What?Healthy ideals, of course. Yet I, an ignoble rabble-rouser and cynic, I know thatthere is nothing simpler than to have healthy ideals. Anyone is capable of them.Each person has healthy ideals, each according to his own convictions. Thesehealthy ideals are a disaster, an illness, the curse of our dishonest century. Os-trowski is a microbe of that illness that Mi™osz has diagnosed. This is how smallcauses bring about monstrous effects. It is easy to have ideals, but it is hard not tofalsify minute details in the name of great ideals.
III
Wednesday
Upon meeting the young painter Eichler at the Grodzickis’, I said: I don’tbelieve in painting! (To musicians I say, I don’t believe in music!) Then I found outfrom Zygmunt Grocholski that Eichler asked him if I make up these paradoxes for28Volume 1the hell of it. They can’t imagine how much truth there is in them, truth that isprobably truer than the truths that nourish their slavish ‘‘attachment’’ to art.Yesterday I went to the Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes with N. N., aftersubmitting to his pleas. The excess of paintings exhausted me even before I beganto look at them. We would walk from room to room, stop at one of the paintings,then move on to another painting. Of course, my companion exhaled ‘‘simplicity’’and ‘‘naturalness’’ (that secondary naturalness that is a victory over artiﬁciality)and, in keeping with the obligatory savoir-vivre, he avoided anything that could beconstrued as exaggerated. I belched an apathy that gleamed with revulsion, ani-mosity, revolt, anger, and absurdity.There were ten other people besides ourselves who walked up, looked,then walked away. The mechanical quality of their movements, their muteness,gave them the appearance of marionettes and their faces were nonexistent com-pared to the faces that peered out of the canvas. This is not the ﬁrst time that theface of art has irritated me by extinguishing the faces of the living. Who visitsmuseums? A painter, more often a student from a school of ﬁne arts or a pupil fromhigh school, a woman who does not know what to do with her time, a few art lovers,people who have come from afar and are visiting the city. Other than these types,there was practically no one else even though everyone would swear on their kneesthat Titian or Rembrandt are wonders that make their spines tingle.This absence does not surprise me. Large, empty rooms hung with can-vases are repugnant and capable of casting one into pits of depression. Paintingsare not meant to be hung next to one another on a bare wall, a painting is meant toadorn an interior and to be the joy of those who live with it. Here in the museum,the paintings are crowded, the amount crowds the quality, masterpieces countedin dozens stop being masterpieces. Who can look closely at a Murillo when theTiepolo next to it demands attention and thirty other paintings further down shout:look at us! There exists an unbearable, degrading contrast between the intention ofeach of these works of art, which wants to be the only and exclusive one, andhanging the paintings all together in this room. Yet art, not just painting, is full ofsuch marginal clashes, absurdities, uglinesses, and stupidities which we cast out-side of the mainstream of our feelings. An old tenor in the role of the youngSiegfried does not jar us, nor do frescoes we can’t see, a Venus with a broken nose,or an old lady declaiming young poems.195329I, however, am less and less inclined to divide my sensitivity into compart-ments and I do not want to close my eyes to the absurdities that accompany art butare not art. I demand of art not only that it be good art, but also that it be well rootedin life. I do not want to tolerate its too silly temples or its too ridiculous prayers. . . .If these are the masterpieces that are to ﬁll us with admiration, why then do we feelafraid, uncertain and why do our emotions wander blindly? Before we fall on ourknees before a masterpiece, we wonder whether this is supposed to be a master-piece. We ask shyly if this is supposed to astound us. We ask ourselves diligently ifwe are allowed to experience these heavenly raptures, after which we surrenderourselves to admiration. How are we to reconcile this supposedly striking, irresist-ible, spontaneous, and obvious power of art with the indecisiveness of our reac-tion? Every step of the way arise amusing gaffes, terrible mishaps, and fatal mis-takes which unmask all the falseness of our language. The facts challenge our liesevery time. Why is this original worth ten million and its copy (even though it is soperfect that it makes the identical artistic impression) worth only ten thousand?Why is there a pious crowd that gathers before the original, but no one admires thecopy? That painting supplied divine emotions as long as it was considered to be a‘‘work of Leonardo,’’ but today no one will look at it, because a paint analysis hasshown that it is the work of an apprentice. That back by Gauguin is a masterpiece,but in order to evaluate this masterpiece one must be familiar with technique, havethe entire history of painting in one’s head, and have a specialized taste. By whatright then do those who have no preparation admire him? If (and this is what I saidto my companion after we left the museum) instead of analyzing paint, we wouldsubject the reactions of the viewer to a more precise, empirical examination, wewould uncover an unlimited falseness that would bring all the Parthenons crash-ing to the ground and explode the Sistine Chapel with our shame.He looked at me askance. He understood that he was experiencing a crisisof conﬁdence. My reasoning sounded simplistic not because, in his understand-ing, I was not right, but, ﬁrst of all, because this was not the language of a personfrom ‘‘good artistic society’’ and because neither Malraux, nor Cocteau, nor anyother of the people whom he respected would have expressed himself this way.This was a collection of concepts that they had long outgrown. Yes, this was a‘‘lower sphere,’’ something really beneath them. No, one should not speak of art inthis tone! I knew what ﬂashed across his mind: that I am a Pole, that is, a more30Volume 1primitive creature. Yet at the same time I was the author of books which heconsidered ‘‘European,’’ therefore, perhaps it was not Slavic primitivism issuingfrom my lips but perhaps I was making fun of him by making a nut out of myself?He said: You are saying that just to rile me.Rile! If your stupidity riles me then allow me to rile you! Why don’t youwant to see that sophistication not only does not exclude simplicity but should andmust go hand in hand with it? If a person who complicates himself cannot alsosimplify himself at the same time, then he loses his inner resistance to the forcesthat he has awakened in himself and that will destroy him. Even if there werenothing more in my words than a desire to submit to art, while maintainingsovereignty in the face of it, then this ought to be applauded. This is healthy policyfor an artist. Yet other, profounder reasons were crouching within me, about whichhe knew nothing. I could have said to him:You think that I am naive, but it is you who are naive. You have no ideawhat is happening inside of you when you look at a painting. You think that you aregetting close to art voluntarily, enticed by its beauty, that this intimacy is takingplace in an atmosphere of freedom and that delight is being born in you spontane-ously, lured by the divine rod of Beauty. In truth, a hand has grabbed you by thescruff of the neck, led you to this painting and has thrown you to your knees. A willmightier than your own told you to attempt to experience the appropriate emo-tions. Whose hand and whose will? That hand is not the hand of a single man, thewill is collective, born in an interhuman dimension, quite alien to you. So you donot admire at all, you merely try to admire.I could have said all this and a lot more, but I restrained myself. All of thismust remain stiﬂed within me. How does one lend this thought the right weight,how does one build it up and organize it into a more elaborate work, if my time isthat of a minor clerk and not respected by anyone. Should I speak out of the side ofmy mouth? Should I allude to a truth that is impossible to elicit in its entirety? Ihad to remain unconfessed, fragmentary, and helpless in the face of an absurditythat distorted me. And not just me.He says: I admire. I say: You are trying to admire. A slight difference, yet onthis slight difference is built a mountain of devout lies. It is in this deceitfulschool that style is formed. Not just artistic style, but the style of thinking and195331feeling of the elite which comes here in order to perfect its sensitivity and achieve asureness of form.
Friday
I recall a lecture which I gave a few years ago in Fray Mocho (later printedin Kultura: ‘‘Against Poets’’). At the time I had tried to show those Argentines, whowere so removed, after all, from Europe, the necessity of renewing our approach topoetry. I was told: What? You, who are a typically elite writer, demand that art befor ‘‘everyone’’?Yet this does not mean that I insist on a popular art, nor that I am (and thiswas said, too) an enemy of art, nor that I doubt its importance and meaning. I onlyclaim that it acts differently than we think. I am angered that an ignorance of thismechanism makes us inauthentic exactly at the point where honesty has thegreatest worth. And it angers me most in Poles.Our Slavic attitude to artistic matters is lax. We are less involved in art thanthe Western European nations and so we can afford a greater freedom of move-ment. This is exactly what I often said to Zygmunt Grocholski, who takes hisPolishness (which is very elemental in him and is crushed by Paris) very seriously.His struggles are as hard as those of so many Polish artists, for whom the onerallying cry is ‘‘Catch up to Europe!’’ Unfortunately they are impeded in thispursuit by their being a different and very speciﬁc type of European, born in aplace where Europe is no longer fully Europe. I said something to this effect toEichler when we talked at the Grodzickis’:‘‘I am amazed that Polish painters do not try to exploit their trump card,which is their Polishness, in art. Are you going to imitate the West forever? Pros-trate yourselves before painting, like the French? Paint with gravity? Paint on yourknees in great deference, paint timidly? I acknowledge this type of painting, but itis not in our nature because our traditions are different. Poles have never beenespecially concerned with art. We were inclined to believe that the nose was not forthe snuff box but the snuff box for the nose. We preferred the thought that ‘man ishigher than what he produces.’ Stop being afraid of your own paintings, stopadoring art, treat it in a Polish manner, look down at it, wield it, and then the32Volume 1originality in you will be freed, new avenues will open before you and you will gainthat which is the most valuable, the most fertile: your own reality.’’I could not convince Eichler, who had invested a great deal of energy andeffort in creating a solid Europeanism for himself, and he merely looked at me inthat by now familiar way, as if to say: how easy it is to talk! Painters and sculptorsare crushed by the enormity of technical difﬁculties and so they concentrate ontheir struggle for the perfect line, color: they do not, generally speaking, desire toextricate themselves from their workshops. They underestimate the fact that a newway of seeing allows them to undo several knots that would otherwise not getuntied. When I, therefore, demand of them that they be people who paint, theywant only to be painters. I am conﬁdent, however, that today we have room inourselves for thought about art which is more speciﬁcally ours and more creative.For we have experienced two concepts one after another, of which one, the aristo-cratic, forces the recipient to admire that which one can neither feel nor under-stand and the other, the proletarian one, which forces the creator to fabricatesomething that he despises, that is beneath him and good only for simpletons andimbeciles. The struggle between these two hostile schools takes place on our bodyand they destroy each other with such force that a vacuum has been created in us.Will we ever get ourselves out of this Turkish bath puriﬁed and capable of our ownseparate creative act?Do not waste your precious time in pursuit of Europe. You will never catchup with her. Don’t try to become Polish Matisses, you will not spawn a Braque withyour deﬁciencies. Strike, rather, at European art. Be those who unmask. Instead ofpulling yourselves up to someone else’s maturity, try instead to reveal Europe’simmaturity. Try to organize your true feelings, so that they will gain an objectiveexistence in the world. Find theories consistent with your practice. Create a crit-icism of art from your point of view. Create an image of the world, man, andculture which will be in harmony with you, because if you can paint this picture, itwill not be difﬁcult to paint others.
Saturday
G. R. read me a letter (which he claims was addressed to me) that hereceived from a Polish woman. I copied the following passages:195333‘‘Of course, I don’t want to know anything, anything, anything at all, I justwant to believe. I believe in the infallibility of my faith and in the actuality ofmy principles. A person who is healthy does not want to expose himself tobacteria and I do not want to inhale thought vapors which could underminemy faith, which is indispensable to me and my life, and which is even my verylife itself. . . .‘‘One can believe only if one wants to believe and only if one nurturesone’s belief. He who deliberately puts his faith to the test, in order to check ifit is able to withstand it, he no longer believes in his belief. Yes, for not onlymust one believe. One must believe that one must believe. One must havefaith in faith! One must come to love faith in oneself.‘‘Faith without faith in faith is not strong, nor can it give one the leastsatisfaction.’’
I read this in Fray Mocho. I was asked with great curiosity if Catholicism inPoland is as fervent now as it was before and whether or not Polonia siempre ﬁdelis?I said that today’s Poland is a piece of stale bread which breaks into two halves witha snap: the believing and the nonbelieving. After returning home I thought that theabove passages were worthy of scrutiny. That ‘‘faith in faith,’’ that strong accent onan act of will which ‘‘creates faith,’’ that retreat from faith into the region where it iscreated, this is something that really addresses me.Plus: what sort of position am I to take regarding Catholicism? I am notthinking of my strictly artistic work, because there one does not select positions orbases. Art creates itself, but I am thinking about my literature in its social form,about those articles, feuilletons. I am starkly alone when facing this problembecause our thought, paralyzed in the year 1939, has not taken even one stepforward in the area of fundamental issues. We cannot think anything throughbecause we do not have a free mind. Our thought is so riveted to our predicamentand so fascinated by Communism that we are capable only of thinking against or forit. We are secured to its chariot avant la lettre, it has conquered us, tying us to itself,even though we rejoice at the semblance of our freedom. Thus we are allowed tothink about Catholicism only as a force capable of resisting, and God has becomethe pistol with which we would like to shoot Marx. This is a holy secret, which bowsthe heads of exquisite Masons, drives the anticleric wit out of lay feuilletons,dictates moving stanzas to the Virgin Mother to the poet Lecho ´ n, restores a stirring34Volume 1First Holy Communion innocence to socialist-atheist professors, and, in general, isthe miracle worker of which philosophers have long dreamed. But is this thetriumph of God or Marx? If I were Marx, I would be proud; if I were God, I wouldfeel a little uncomfortable as an absolute. Pharisees! If you need Catholicism, thenbe a little more digniﬁed and try to approach it a little more sincerely. Don’t let thatcommon front be sheer politics. I insist only that whatever happens in our spirituallife happen in the profoundest and most honest way. The time has come in whichatheists should seek a new understanding with the Church.The issue considered in an elementary way, however, immediately be-comes discouragingly difﬁcult, so that our hands really do hang helplessly at oursides. How are we supposed to come to an understanding with someone whobelieves, who wants to believe and will not entertain any other thought except theone that dogma will not include in its prohibitory index? Does any sort of mutualtongue exist between me, who derives from Montaigne and Rabelais, and thatcorrespondent so passionate in her faith? Whatever I might say, she will measure itagainst her doctrine. Everything is already resolved in her, because she alreadyknows the ultimate truth about the universe. Which means her humanity has analtogether different character and, from my viewpoint, an immeasurably strangeone. In order to come to terms with her, I would have to demolish her ultimatetruths, and the more convincing I become, the more satanic will I become in hereyes and the harder she will cover her ears. She is not allowed to entertain doubt,and my reasons will become nourishment for her credo quia absurdum.A dangerous analogy comes to mind here, however. When you talk to aCommunist, don’t you have the impression that you are speaking to a ‘‘believer’’?For a Communist, too, everything is taken care of, at least in the current phase ofthe dialectical process. He is in possession of the truth, he knows. And, what ismore, he believes, and what is still more, he wants to believe. Even if you couldprove otherwise to him, he will not be convinced, because he has given himself upto the Party. The Party knows better, the Party knows from him. Doesn’t it seem toyou that when your words were bouncing off this hermeticism like peas off a wall,that the real line of demarcation runs between the believers and nonbelievers andthat this continent of faith encompasses such diverse churches as Catholicism,Communism, Nazism, Fascism. At that very moment you felt like someone threat-ened by a colossal Holy Inquisition.195335Saturday
Engineer L. invited me to the meeting of a certain Catholic society. Abouttwenty people and a monk. A short prayer was said, after which L. read passagesfrom Simone Weil in his own very good, from what I could judge, translation. Adiscussion followed.As always at such meetings, I was struck at ﬁrst glance by the lamentabletechnical drawbacks of this undertaking. Simone Weil is difﬁcult, dense, loadedwith internal experience. One has to return to many of her thoughts over and overagain. Who of these people could capture them in ﬂight, assimilate and committhem to memory? Even if they had been grasped . . .The discussion was of the type that is incapable of disturbing anyone,because it has become their daily fare. In spite of this, it seemed that the situationspoke to me like Shakespeare:
Yet have I something in me dangerousWhich let thy wiseness fear.
It is not true that all are equal, and that each person can discuss another.Simone Weil was falling into the hands of those less sophisticated minds, of thoseprobably less mature souls, and in this hapless move they began to work over aphenomenon that is a lot higher and superior to themselves? They spoke modestlyand without airs, but no one could get himself to say that he did not understandand that he had no right to talk about this at all.The strangest thing was that they, who personally were a great deal inferiorto Weil, treated her from on high, from the heights of that collective wisdom thatmade them superior. They felt that they were in the possession of Truth. If Socrateshimself had shown up at this session they would have treated him like a freshman,because he hadn’t been initiated. They know it all much better.It is exactly this mechanism—which allows the inferior man to avoid apersonal confrontation with the superior man—that seemed immoral to me.
Sunday
Yet I do not want, I do not desire a war with Catholicism. I am honestlyseeking an understanding. One, of course, that is independent of the political36Volume 1situation. Much time has passed since Boy* attacked ‘‘the black occupation.’’ I hadnever been a proponent of a too one-dimensional secularism, and the war and thepostwar period did not change me much in this regard. They rather supported mein insisting on a more ﬂexible world, with a profounder perspective.If I can coexist with Catholicism it is because ideas concern me less andless while I put all the emphasis on man’s attitude toward the idea. An idea is andalways will be a screen behind which are other and more important issues. An ideais a pretext, an auxiliary tool. Thought torn away from human reality is somethingmajestic and splendid, but diluted in a mass of passionate and insufﬁcient beingsbecomes nothing more than commotion. I am bored by stupid discussions. By thequadrille of argumentation. The insolent carrying on of intellectuals. The emptyformulas of philosophy. Our conversations would be great, ah, yes, full of logic,discipline, erudition, method, precision. They would be fundamental, momen-tous, profound, innovative, if they were not taking place twenty stories above us.Not long ago, I had breakfast with one of these intellectuals. No one could haveguessed, listening to the deﬁnitions supported by so many quotations, that this wasan absolutely blind half-wit who works off his energy in the higher realms.This weariness is not mine alone. And it is increasingly inhibiting to anygenuine exchange of thought. I practically do not listen at all anymore to themeaning of the words, I listen only to how they are said. I demand only that mannot allow himself to be duped by his own words of wisdom, that his worldview nottake away his common sense, that his doctrine not deprive him of his humanity,that his system not stiffen and mechanize him, and that his philosophy not makehim a dullard. I live in a world that still feeds on systems, ideas, doctrines, but thesymptoms of indigestibility are clearer and clearer, the patient has already gottenthe hiccups.The reluctance that I feel toward ideas as such allows me to ﬁnd a modusvivendi among people who believe in them. The question that I put to Catholics isnot what kind of God do they believe in, but what kind of people do they aspire tobe? And in asking them, I take into consideration man’s underdevelopment. In myunderstanding, they have fused into a group that is subordinated to a certain myth in
*Tadeusz ‘‘Boy’’ ˙Zele ´nski (1874–1941): poet, translator, and a leading critic and publicist inthe interwar period.195337order to mutually create one another. This is why, for me, this myth has an auxiliarycharacter and it is important what sort of man is born under its inﬂuence. Yet evenhere my demands became less sophisticated than they had been in an epoch oftriumphant reason. Today, when I look at a Catholic, it is as if I were looking atmyself. I see the changes in this mirror which have taken place in me under thesevere historical events of recent years. Today do I ask that humanity be progressive?That it ﬁght superstition? Bear aloft the standard of enlightenment and culture andcare about the development of art and science? Surely, but I would ﬁrst prefer thatthe other man not bite me, spit on me, or torture me to death. Here Catholicism andI come together. I am joined to it by its acute sense of hell contained in our natureand by its fear of man’s excessive dynamics. Looking at a Catholic, I see that I havebecome more cautious in a certain sense. That which in Nietzsche’s proud daypassed for a travesty of a Dionysian life, exactly that careful politics of Catholicism inrelation to natural forces has become dearer to me from the time that the will to live,raised to its maximum strength, began to devour itself.The Church has become close to me in its distrust of man, and my distrust ofform, my urgent desire to withdraw from it, to claim ‘‘that that is not yet I,’’ whichaccompanies my every thought and feeling, coincides with the intentions of itsdoctrine. The Church is afraid of man and I am afraid of man. The Church does nottrust man and I do not trust man. The Church, in opposing temporality to eternity,heaven to earth, tries to provide man with the distance to his own nature that I ﬁndindispensable. And nowhere does this afﬁliation mark itself more strongly than inour approach to Beauty. Both the Church and I fear beauty in this vale of tears, weboth strive to defuse it, we want to defend ourselves against its excessive allure. Theimportant thing for me is that it and I both insist on the division of man: the Churchinto the divine and human components, I into life and consciousness. After theperiod in which art, philosophy, and politics looked for the integral, uniform,concrete, and literal man, the need for an elusive man who is a play of contradic-tions, a fountain of gushing antinomies and a system of inﬁnite compensation, isgrowing. He who calls this ‘‘escapism’’ is unwise.In spite of everything, we mature, somewhere at the very bottom. If, in myopinion, Catholicism has done great harm to Polish development, then it is be-cause Catholicism was reduced in us to a dimension of too easy and too serene aphilosophy, which is at the service of life and its immediate needs. Literature does38Volume 1not have a hard time coming to an understanding with a profound and tragicCatholicism because it contains an emotional content which is growing in us, too,when we look at the frenzy of the world. Retreat! Retreat! Retreat! At the momentwhen we will have gone too far, when we want to back out of ourselves, the geniusof Christ will give us a hand: this soul as no other knows the secret of retreat. TheTeaching, which was the undoing of the Roman Empire, is our ally in the struggleto destroy all those too lofty ediﬁces that we build today and in the struggle to attainnakedness and simplicity and ordinary, elementary virtue.The intellectual crisis that we are experiencing is not caused so much byour doubting the power of reason as much as by the fact that its range is so limited.We were horriﬁed to see that we were surrounded by an abyss made of millions ofignorant minds, which steal away our truths in order to pervert, diminish, andtransform them into instruments of their passions. We discovered that the numberof people is far more signiﬁcant than the quality of the truth. That is why we havesuch a violent need of a basic and simple language, so that it could be the placewhere the philosopher comes together with the illiterate. And that is why weadmire Christianity, which is a wisdom tailored to all minds, a song for all voicesfrom the highest to the lowest, a wisdom that does not have to change itself intostupidity at any level of awareness. Yet, if someone were to tell me that there can beno genuine understanding between a man who is spiritually free and the dogmaticman, I would say to him: Take a closer look at Catholics. They also exist in timeand are subjected to its effects. Slowly and imperceptibly the attitude of the Cath-olic toward his faith is changing. In how many of them will you be able to read thesame thing that I read in the letter cited at the beginning. ‘‘One must believe thatone must believe. One must have faith in faith.’’The father of this woman probably simply believed, without the prefatoryexertions. But she has ﬁrst to ‘‘want to believe’’ in order to believe, her faithbecomes an exertion. When God stops revealing himself to this Catholic womanand she has to create him for herself, don’t we fall from heaven to earth and isn’tthis will to believe rather human, even extremely human? This revealed faith hasbegun, therefore, along with all other human ideas, its march to its sources. Soeven with this approach, truth is not as great an obstacle to understanding as thewill, the desire to impose a certain canon onto oneself, in order to be someonespeciﬁc, in order to be somebody.195339I say for my own beneﬁt: Be aware of this fact, never lose sight of it, seek thepoint where the divine comes together with the human, because upon this rests theentire future of my thought. I should never forget that contemporary beliefs, evenin their most violent manifestations, are no longer a belief in the old sense of theword. Those who want to believe differ very much from those who believe. Moder-nity’s accent on producing belief proves that it does not already exist. Indepen-dently of what our credos are, we must all exchange an already revealed world for aworld that is creating itself. If this does not happen, our last chance for mutualunderstanding will be lost.
Thursday
Concert in Colo ´n.What is the signiﬁcance of the best virtuoso compared to the disposition ofmy soul, which today, this afternoon, was permeated through and through with amelody, badly hummed by someone so that now, this evening, it pushes away themusic served on a golden platter (along with the meatballs) by a maître in tails.The food does not always taste best in ﬁrst-class restaurants. To me, art almostalways speaks more forcefully when it appears in an imperfect, accidental, andfragmentary way, somehow just signaling its presence, allowing one to feel itthrough the ineptitude of the interpretation. I prefer the Chopin that reaches mein the street from an open window to the Chopin served in great style from theconcert stage.This German pianist galloped along accompanied by the orchestra. Rockedto sleep by the tones, my mind wandered in some sort of daydream—reminiscences,things that I had to get done the next day, Bumﬁli, the fox terrier. In the meantime,the concert continued, the pianist galloped on. Was he a pianist or a horse? I couldswear that this had nothing to do with Mozart but rather with whether or not thisnimble steed would wrestle the bit away from Horowitz or Rubinstein. The folkspresent were concerned with the question: of what class is this virtuoso? Do hispianos measure up to those of Arrau’s? Are his fortes attaining the heights of Gulda’s?I imagined, therefore, that this was a boxing match and I saw how he drove Brai™ow-ski down the ropes, how he punched Gieseking with the octaves, and aimed aknockout trill at Solomon. A pianist, a horse, or a boxer? It also seemed to me that he40Volume 1was a boxer who had mounted Mozart, who was riding Mozart, pounding andhitting him, jangling and jabbing him with his spurs. What’s that? He’s reached theﬁnish line? Applause, applause, applause! The jockey got off his horse and bowed,wiping his forehead with a handkerchief.The countess with whom I was sitting in the loge sighed: Oh how wonder-ful, wonderful, wonderful!Her husband the count added: ‘‘I am not an expert, but I had the impres-sion that the orchestra had a hard time keeping up. . . .’’I looked at them as if they were dogs! How upsetting when the aristocracydoes not know how to behave! How little we demand of them and then they can’teven do that! These people ought to have known that music is only a pretext for asocial get-together, of which even they were a part along with their manners andmanicures. Yet instead of remaining in their territory, in their aristocratic-socialworld, they wanted to take art seriously, they felt obliged to pay it timid homageand so, jolted out of their count- and countessness, they bumbled into sophomor-ism! I would have gladly agreed to purely formal platitudes, expressed with thecynicism of people who know the weight of compliments, but they tried to behonest—poor things!After which we moved into the foyer. My eyes rested on an excellent littlecrowd that circulated, dispensing bows. Do you see the millionaire X, Y? Look,look, there is the general and the ambassador and over there, the chairman isbuttering up the minister, who is simpering in the direction of the professor’s wife!I had the feeling, therefore, that I was among Proust’s characters, who went to theconcert not to listen but to grace it with their presence, where the ladies stuckWagner into their hair as they would a diamond pin. Where the sounds of Bachaccompanied the parade of names, ranks, titles, money, and power. But what’s this,what’s this? When I joined their ranks, I encountered the twilight of the gods, allthe greatness and power were gone. I overheard them sharing their impressions ofthe concert, which were timid, humble, full of respect for music and worse thanwhat an ‘‘aﬁcionado’’ from the gallery could have said. This is what they had beenreduced to. It seemed to me that these were not presidents but ﬁfth-grade pupilsand because I return to my school days reluctantly, I left this timid youth.Alone, in the loge, I, a modern person, deprived of superstitions, I, anantisalon man, I out of whose head the whip of defeat had knocked the sulks and195341airs, thought that a world in which man adores himself with music is more con-vincing than a world in which man adores the music itself.After which, the remainder of the concert got underway. The pianist,sitting down to Brahms, galloped on. No one really knew what was being playedbecause the perfection of the pianist did not allow one to concentrate on Brahms,and the perfection of Brahms drew attention away from the pianist. But he gotthere. Applause. The applause of the knowledgeable. The applause of amateurs.The applause of the ignorant. The applause of the herd. Applause incited byapplause. Applause feeding on itself, piling onto itself, exciting, creating applause.And no one could not clap because everyone was clapping.We went backstage to give our regards to the artist.The artist was shaking hands, exchanging courtesies, and accepting com-pliments and invitations with the wan smile of an errant comet. I looked at himand his greatness. He himself seemed quite pleasant, yes, sensitive, intelligent,cultured, but his greatness? He wore that greatness the way he wore his tails, and,really, hadn’t they been tailor-made? At the sight of so many eager kudos it mighthave seemed that there was no difference between his fame and Debussy’s orRavel’s, after all, his name was on everyone’s lips, too, and he was an ‘‘artist’’ as theyhad been. Yet . . . yet . . . was he famous like Beethoven or famous like Gilletteblades or a Waterman pen? What a difference between the fame for which onepays and the one from which one makes a proﬁt!But he was too weak to oppose the mechanism that was exalting him, onecould not expect resistance on his part. Quite the contrary. He danced to the tune.And he played for those who were dancing around him.
IV
Friday
I write this diary reluctantly. Its dishonest honesty wearies me. For whomam I writing? If I am writing for myself, then why is it being published? If for thereader, why do I pretend that I am talking to myself? Are you talking to yourself sothat others will hear you?How far I am from the certitude and vigor that hum in me when I am,42Volume 1pardon me, ‘‘creating.’’ Here, on these pages, I feel as if I were emerging from ablessed night into the hard light of dawn, which ﬁlls me with yawning and drags myshortcomings out into the open. The duplicity inherent in keeping a diary makesme timid, so forgive me, oh, forgive me (perhaps these last words are dispensable,perhaps they are already pretentious?).Yet I realize that one must be oneself at all levels of writing, which is to say,that I ought to be able to express myself not only in a poem or drama, but also ineveryday prose—in an article or in a diary—and the ﬂight of art has to ﬁnd itscounterpart in the domain of regular life, just as the shadow of the condor is castonto the ground. What’s more, this passage into an everyday world from an areathat is backed into the most remote depths, practically in the underground, is amatter of great importance to me. I want to be a balloon, but one with ballast;an antenna, but one that is grounded. I want to be capable of translating my-self into everyday speech, but—traduttore, traditore. Here I betray myself, I ambeneath myself.The difﬁculty consists in the fact that I write about myself not at night, notin isolation, but right in a newspaper in front of people. In these circumstances, Icannot treat myself with the appropriate gravity, I have to be ‘‘modest’’ and thenagain, I am tormented by that which has tormented me throughout my entire lifeand which has so greatly inﬂuenced my way of being with other people. Thenecessity of slighting myself in order to be in tune with those who slight me, or whodon’t know the least little thing about me. I will not submit myself to that ‘‘mod-esty’’ at any price and I consider it my mortal enemy. Happy Frenchmen who writetheir diaries with tact, except that I don’t believe in the value of their tact, I knowthat theirs is only a tactful circumvention of the problem, which by its very natureis unsociable.But I should grab the bull by the horns. From childhood I have been verymuch initiated into this matter, it grew right along with me so that today I should bepretty comfortable with it. I know and I have said this on many occasions, that everyartist has to be pompous because he aspires to be on a pedestal. Yet I have also saidthat concealing these pretensions is a stylistic ﬂaw, and a sign of a faulty ‘‘innerresolution.’’ Openness. One must play with uncovered cards. Writing is nothingmore than a battle that the artist wages with others for his own prominence.Yet if I am incapable of making this thought real here in the diary, what is it195343worth? Yet somehow I cannot, and something bothers me because there is noartistic form between me and people and our contact becomes too embarrassing. Iought to treat this diary as an instrument of my becoming before you. I ought tostrive to have you understand me in some way, in a way that would enable me tohave (and let this dangerous word appear) talent. Let this diary be more modernand more conscious and let it be permeated by the idea that my talent can ariseonly in connection with you, that is, that only you can excite me to talent or, what’smore, that only you can create it in me.I would like people to see in me that which I suggest to them. I would liketo impose myself on people as a personality in order to be its subject forever afterthat. Other diaries should be to this one what the words ‘‘I am like this’’ are to ‘‘Iwant to be like this.’’ We are used to lifeless words that merely ascertain. A betterword is one that brings to life. Spiritus movens. If I could only succeed in summon-ing the spirit that moves to the ﬁrst pages of this diary, I could do a great deal. Icould, ﬁrst of all (and I need this even more because I am a Polish author), shatterthis narrow cage of concepts in which you would like to imprison me. Far toomany people, worthy of a better fate, have been shackled. I alone should designatethe role I am to play.Furthermore, by suggesting, somewhat in the way of a proposition, certainproblems, more or less linked to me, I pull myself into them and they lead me toother secrets still unknown to me. To travel as far as possible into the virgin territoryof culture, into its still half-wild, and so indecent, places, while exciting you toextremes, to excite even myself . . . I want to meet you in that jungle, bind myself toyou in a way that is the most difﬁcult and uncomfortable, for you and for me. Don’tI have to distinguish myself from current European thought? Aren’t my enemiesthe currents and doctrines to which I am similar? I have to attack them in order toforce myself into contradistinction and I have to force you to conﬁrm it. I want touncover my present moment and tie myself to you in our todayness.In this little diary I would like to set out to openly construct a talent formyself, as openly as Henry fabricates a marriage for himself in the third act. Whyopenly? Because I desire to reveal myself, to stop being too easy a riddle for you tosolve. By taking you to the backstage of my being, I force myself to retreat to aneven more remote depth.That is all. If only I could summon the spirit. But I don’t feel equal to the44Volume 1task. Three years ago, unfortunately, I broke with pure art, as my kind of art was notthe kind that could be cultivated casually, on Sundays or holidays. I began to writethis diary for the simple reason of saving myself, in fear of degradation and anultimate inundation by the waves of a trivial life, which are already up to my neck.Yet it turns out that even here I am incapable of total effort. One cannot benothingness all week and then suddenly expect to exist on Sunday. Journalists andyou, honorable counselors and spectators, have no need to fear. You no longerneed to feel threatened by any conceit and incomprehension on my part. I amtumbling into publicism along with you and the rest of the world.
Saturday
My attitude to Poland is a consequence of my attitude to form: I would liketo elude Poland as I elude style, I would like to soar above Poland, as above style,here and there, my task is the same.In a way, I feel like Moses. Yes, this is an amusing characteristic of mynature: to exaggerate on my own behalf. In my daydreams, I puff myself up as muchas I can. Ha, ha, why, you ask, do I feel like Moses? A hundred years ago, aLithuanian poet forged the shape of the Polish spirit and today, I, like Moses, amleading the Poles out of slavery of that form. I am leading the Pole out of himself. Ilaughed myself to tears over this megalomania of mine! Yet, theoretically speaking,this type of antinomy would not be totally unjustiﬁed and I would be curiousto know how many people from our current so-called pleno titulo intelligentsiawould be capable of feeling the meaning of this process. Oh, that a certain Pole,exactly because he was excessively, too forcefully, a Pole and only a Pole, wanted toliberate himself categorically from the Pole in himself and that it was exactly hereamong us, as a consequence of that strong losing of oneself in the nation, that quitethe opposite feeling and an idea totally contradictory to it had to be born. I ask, too,how many of these p.t. intellectuals would be capable of understanding whatimmense possibilities are created before us by this opportunity, under the conditionthat it ﬁnds people adequately determined and broad-minded to take it to itsultimate conclusion. How invigorating! What a tide of creative energy! Whatresilience in this new freedom based on the revised relationship of one Pole toanother! Ah, I dream sometimes of ﬁnding supporters who would blow me up to the195345dimensions of an event in our history and I assure you that this would not beimpossible because, in my understanding, the signiﬁcance of a work depends asmuch on who reads it as on who writes it. There are so many books that could ringout like the trumpets of Jericho if people would raise them aloft and blow into them!Sleep, my little trumpet, tossed onto the rubbish of unexploited Polish possibilities.The rubbish heap. The point is exactly that I come from your rubbishheap. All that you cast off through the centuries as refuse is now speaking outthrough me. If my form is a parody of form, then my spirit is a parody of spirit andmy person a parody of a person. Isn’t it true that one cannot undermine form byopposing it with another form, but only by laxity in one’s very attitude toward it?No, it is not a coincidence that precisely at the moment when we desperately needa hero, up pops a clown—a conscious and, thereby, serious clown. You were tooliteral for too long, too naive in your game with fate. You forgot that man not only ishimself but also pretends to be himself. You threw everything that was acting andtheater in you into the trash can and you tried to forget about it. Now, when youlook out the window, you see that a tree has sprung up on that trash heap, a treethat is a parody of a tree.Assuming that I was born (which is not certain), I was born to spoil yourgame. My books are not supposed to say to you: Be who you are. They say rather:You pretend that you are who you are. I would like that which you have longthought barren and even shameful in yourselves to become fruitful. If you hateacting so much, it is because it is a part of you. For me, acting becomes a key to lifeand reality. If you are repelled by immaturity, it is because you are immature. Inme, Polish immaturity delineates my entire attitude to culture. Your youth speakswith my lips, your desire for mirth, your elusive ﬂexibility and lack of delineation.You hate that which you try to eliminate in yourself. In me, the hidden Pole isliberated, your alter ego, the ﬂip side of your coin, that part of your moon thathas been unseen until now. Ah, but I would like you to be conscious actors inthis game!Right now am I thinking about the nation’s masses, the thousands andthousands of ordinary people? What do they need this for? Sorry, but in thedarkness in which I ﬁnd myself I can act in no other way except blindly. I write allthis in the way of a proposition in order to see the reaction. If the reaction ispositive, I will move on.46Volume 1Wednesday
My presumption smells of grave illness. I am beginning to fear that thefeuilleton writers will give me a well-deserved thrashing. But what should I do withmy overweening pride? Should I go see a doctor? (This was written to protectmyself and in protecting myself, to gain a greater freedom of maneuver.)Then again, do I understand myself? In delineating myself, I sin not justagainst my own philosophy but, ﬁrst of all, against my own lyrical element. One fartoo perceptive reader warns me in a letter: You shouldn’t write commentary onyourself! You should just write! What a shame that you allow yourself to be provokedand write introductions to your own works, introductions and even commentary!Yet I have to explain myself as best as I can and as much as I can. I amhaunted by the conviction that the writer who cannot write about himself isincomplete.
Thursday
Z. K. For the past few years I have been spending about seven hours a dayin one room. My co-worker was a clerk like myself and I grew to like him. LastFriday, I said good-bye to him as usual. On Monday he never turned up at his desk.He disappeared, that is, died. He died suddenly and vanished completely as if ahand had withdrawn him from us. I saw him once again in a casket, where helooked obtrusive drawing all eyes to himself. Painful impression.Every so often one of my colleagues evaporates like that and then, shrug-ging our shoulders, we say: Hm, hm (what else can we say?) and a light consterna-tion hangs in the air. Yet the great majority of us clerks are already in the process ofdying. People over forty killing themselves off slowly, each year one year older. Atthe funeral I thought: it is not the living who are bidding farewell to the deceasedbut the dying. At the cemetery, on a bright afternoon, the faces were marked with acertain basic hopelessness and looked cadaverous, like the cadaver in the cofﬁn,and each person dragged himself around like a bag ﬁlled with death.Throughout the entire funeral, the ugliness of the slow death that we callaging weighed on me like a boulder, a boulder sans phrases. I thought, too, aboutthe mystiﬁcation that accompanies it. There cannot be a greater contradictionamong people than the entering and exiting biography, development and decline,195347man after thirty who is beginning to end and man before thirty who is still develop-ing. This is ﬁre and water, here something in man’s very essence changes. Whatdoes a young man have in common with an aging man if each is written in adifferent key? It would seem that there should be two separate languages: one forthose who have more and more of life and another for those who have less and less.Yet this contrast has been passed over in silence. The aging pretend that they stilllive and no one has been capable of creating a separate word for people steppinginto dying. Look at art, it does what it can to blur the fatal boundary. Listen to howthose ‘‘grown-ups’’ talk to one another, the same youthful speech, jokes, the sameairs and graces, spiced only with a bit of void and caricature. The fact that ourlanguage does not drastically change after we step across the fatal boundary line,that there is no abyss between Beethoven’s ﬁrst and last sonatas that cannot beﬁlled, is proof positive that man in his individual existence cannot express himself,that he is silence, that he is deprived of expression.Current French thought about death is exceptionally artiﬁcial to me as areall the other memento mori. They constitute one more example of the degree towhich our thoughts are alien to us. This mangling of death shows only that we arenot in a state to assimilate it because if we really felt our way into its presence, itwould have to deprive us of sleep and appetite. Yet death doesn’t even prevent usfrom going to the movies. Not to mention a Catholic death with its purgatory andhell, teeming with the anticipation of pain. We must not, therefore, take our ownthoughts seriously and it seems as if that thought thought itself, Hegelian style.I do not believe, therefore, that death is man’s real problem or that an artthat is entirely permeated by it is completely authentic. Our real issue is growingold, that aspect of death that we experience daily. Perhaps not even growing old butthe fact that it is so completely, so terribly cut off from beauty. Our gradual dyingdoes not disturb us, it is rather that the beauty of life becomes inaccessible to us. Atthe cemetery I spotted a young boy walking among the graves like a being fromanother world, mysteriously and abundantly blooming, while we looked like pau-pers. It struck me, however, that I did not feel our helplessness as somethingcategorically inevitable.And I liked this feeling in myself at once. I hang onto only those thoughtsand feelings that I like. I am incapable of feeling or thinking anything that wouldcompletely annihilate me. So that even here I followed this line of thinking which,48Volume 1because it derived from me, created hope. Was it really impossible to bind old ageto life and youth? That artiﬁciality, to which I am becoming more and moreaccustomed in man, that idée ﬁxe, which grows so gradually and so reluctantly inme, the thought that the terrifying concreteness of our form is not the only pos-sibility, makes the world supple. If at one time I had believed that everything hadalready been said, today I am surrounded by endless combinations of ideas andforms and everything around me becomes fertile. (Here I would like to note that Isearched for a half hour for the sentence which will appear below because, asalways, I am trying to formulate a problem without knowing whether a solution ispossible and I did not really think the issue through at the cemetery.)According to me, youth at the core of its spirit does not like its own beautyand defends itself against it, and that distrust of its own beauty is more beauti-ful than beauty itself and contains the only possibility of overcoming the distancethat kills.
Friday
Giedroyc wanted me to reply to Cioran’s (a Rumanian writer) article, ‘‘TheConveniences and Inconveniences of Exile.’’ The answer contains my view of therole of literature in exile.
Cioran’s words reek of a basement coolness and the rot of the grave, but they aretoo petty. Who is he talking about? Who should one understand to be the‘‘writer in exile’’? Adam Mickiewicz wrote books and so does Mr. X, quite correctand readable ones, both are ‘‘writers’’ and nota bene, writers in exile, but hereall parallels end.Rimbaud? Norwid? Kafka? S™owacki? (There are a variety of exiles.) Ibelieve that none of them would have been too horriﬁed at this category of hell.It is very painful not to have readers and very unpleasant not to be able topublish one’s works. It certainly is not sweet being unknown, highly unpleasantto see oneself deprived of the aid of that mechanism that pushes one to the top,that creates publicity and organizes fame, but art is loaded with elements ofloneliness and self-sufﬁciency, it ﬁnds its satisfaction and sense of purpose initself. The homeland? Why, every eminent person because of that very eminencewas a foreigner even at home. Readers? Why, they never wrote ‘‘for’’ readers195349anyway, always ‘‘against’’ them. Honors, success, reknown, fame: why, theybecame famous exactly because they valued themselves more than their success.And that which is a little Kafka, Conrad, or Mickiewicz in even thesmaller caliber writer, that which is genuine talent and real superiority or realmaturity, will in no measure ﬁt into Cioran’s basement. I would also like toremind Cioran that not only émigré but all art remains in the most intimatecontact with decay, it is born of decadence, it is a transmutation of illness intohealth. All art, generally speaking, borders on silliness, defeat, degradation. Isthere an artist who is not, as Cioran says, ‘‘an ambitious being, aggressive in hisdefeat, embittered, a conniving conqueror’’? Has Cioran ever seen an artist orwriter who was not, who did not have to be, a megalomaniac? And art, as Boyonce correctly said, is a graveyard: for every thousand people who were incapa-ble of ‘‘coming into existence’’ and who remained in a sphere of painful insufﬁ-ciency, barely one or two is capable of really ‘‘coming into existence.’’ This dirt,therefore, this venom of unsatisﬁed ambitions, this tossing and turning in avacuum, this catastrophe has very little to do with emigration and a lot to dowith art. They make up an aspect of every literary café and truly it is a matter ofindifference where in the world the writers who are not writers enough in order toreally be writers, suffer.And perhaps it is healthier that they were deprived of doles, applause, allthose tiny caresses that the state and society lavished upon them in the good olddays in the name of ‘‘supporting native creativity.’’ This family playing at great-ness and distinction, the sympathetic noise created at one time by the conde-scendingly smiling press and the half-baked critics, deprived of a feeling for thescale of events, that process of artiﬁcially pumping candidates up into a ‘‘na-tional writer’’ . . . didn’t all this reek of kitsch? And the result? Nations that at bestwere capable of producing a few authentic writers nurtured entire hosts ofwonders in this incubator, and in this familial warmth, which was a mixture ofspinsterish goodness and a cynical disregard for values, all hierarchy disinte-grated. Is it surprising then that these hothouse creations, nurtured in the wombof the nation, wilt when out of the womb? Cioran writes about how a writer tornaway from his people is lost. If that is the case, this writer never existed in the ﬁrstplace: he was a writer in embryo. Instead, it seems to me that theoreticallyspeaking and bypassing material hardship, the immersing of oneself in theworld, that is, emigration, should constitute an incredible stimulus for literature.50Volume 1For lo and behold the country’s elite is kicked out over the border. It canthink, feel, and write from the outside. It gains distance. It gains an incrediblespiritual freedom. All bonds burst. One can be more of oneself. In the generaldin all the forms that have existed until now loosen up and one can movetoward the future in a more ruthless way.An exceptional opportunity! The moment everyone has dreamed of! Itwould seem, therefore, that the stronger individuals, the richer individualswould roar like lions! Then why don’t they? Why has the voice of these peoplefaded abroad?They do not roar because, ﬁrst of all, they are too free. Art demandsstyle, order, discipline. Cioran correctly underscores the danger of too muchisolation, of excessive freedom. Everything to which they were tied and every-thing that bound them—homeland, ideology, politics, group, program, faith,milieu—everything vanished in the whirlpool of history and only a bubble ﬁlledwith nothingness remained on the surface. Those thrown out of their little worldfound themselves facing a world, a boundless world and, consequently, one thatwas impossible to master. Only a universal culture can come to terms with theworld, never parochial cultures, never those who live only on fragments ofexistence. Only he who knows how to reach deeper, beyond the homeland, onlyhe for whom the homeland is but one of the revelations in an eternal anduniversal life, will not be incited to anarchy by the loss of his homeland. Theloss of a homeland will not disturb the internal order of only those whosehomeland is the world. Contemporary history has turned out to be too violentand borderless for literatures too national and speciﬁc.And it is exactly this excess of freedom that inhibits the writer most.Threatened by the enormity of the world and the ﬁnality of its affairs, they graspat the past convulsively; they cling desperately to themselves; they want toremain as they were; they fear even the slightest change in themselves, thinkingthat everything will then fall apart; and, ﬁnally, they cling convulsively to theonly hope remaining: the hope of recovering the homeland. Recovering thehomeland, however, cannot come to pass without waging a battle, and a battlerequires strength and collective strength can be achieved only by giving up one’sI. In order to produce this strength, the writer must impose a blind faith, amongother deﬁciencies, on himself and his compatriots and the luxury of objectiveand free thinking becomes a grievous sin. He does not know how to be a writer195351without a homeland or in order to regain his homeland, he has to stop being awriter, at least a serious writer.Though perhaps there is yet another reason for this spiritual paralysis,at least where it is not a matter of intellectuals but artists. I have in mind thevery concept of art and the artist, as it has come to be accepted in WesternEurope. It does not seem to be that our modern beliefs concerning the essence ofart, the role of the artist, the relationship of artist to society have tallied withreality. The artistic philosophy of the West derives from the elite in crystallizedsocieties where nothing interferes with conventional language but there is noth-ing a man thrown outside the limits of convention can do with such a philoso-phy. The concept of art forged on that side of the curtain by the victoriousbureaucracy of the proletariat is even more elitist and more naive. An artist inemigration, however, is forced to exist not only outside of his people, but alsooutside of the elite. He confronts the spiritually and intellectually inferiorsphere far more directly. Nothing isolates him from this contact, he has person-ally to endure the pressure of a brutal and immature life. He is like a bankruptcount who sees that the manners of the salon are worthless if there is no salon.Sometimes this pushes people in the direction of ‘‘democratic’’ shallowness, intoa kindly ordinariness or into a crude ‘‘realism’’ and sometimes it condemnsthem to isolation. We have to ﬁnd a way to feel like aristocrats once again (inthe deeper sense of the word).Therefore, if there is talk about the disintegration and decadence ofémigré literature, then this notion of the issue would be closest to me becausehere, at least, we liberate ourselves for a moment from the vicious circle oftrivialities and touch the difﬁculties capable of destroying authentic writers. Ido not deny at all that overcoming these problems requires a great determina-tion and boldness of spirit. It is not easy to be an émigré writer, which meansalmost total isolation. Why should it be surprising, therefore, that overcome byour own weakness and the enormity of the tasks, we bury our heads in the sandand, organizing parodies of the past for ourselves, we ﬂee the big world to live inour little one?Yet sooner or later our thought must work its way out of the impasse.Our problems will ﬁnd people to solve them. At some point, it is no longer amatter of creativity itself, but the recovery of the capacity to create. We have toproduce that portion of freedom, boldness, ruthlessness, and even, I would say,52Volume 1irresponsibility, without which creation is impossible. We have to accustomourselves to a new scale of existence. We will have to treat our most cherishedfeelings unceremoniously, with sangfroid in order to attain other values. Theminute we begin to shape the world in the place where we happen to be andwith the means at our disposal, the enormity of the task will shrink, the bound-lessness will become delineated, and the turbulent waters of chaos will begin torecede.
Thursday
Someone in Paris sent me a package of important French books, assumingquite rightly that I had not read them and that I should read them. I am con-demned to read only those books that fall into my hands, because I cannot afford tobuy them. I gnash my teeth when I see industrialists and merchants buying them-selves libraries to adorn their studies, while I have no access to works that I need forsomewhat different reasons.You demand, nevertheless, that I be well read and well informed, right?Iwaszkiewicz once told me that an artist should not know too much. That is rightbut he cannot allow his voice to be late, either, and the boundless stupidity of asystem that slams the doors of theaters, concert halls, and bookshops in his face willbe avenged. A system that shoves the intellectual into a distant corner, that takesthe possibility of development away from the intelligentsia, will be judged appro-priately in the future and your grandchildren will consider you idiots (but what doyou care!).It is only now, thanks to a certain friendly Parisian generosity, that I can getacquainted with Camus’s L’homme révolté, a year after the book was published. Iam reading it ‘‘under the desk’’ as I once did in school, so that Camus might havehis reservations about this kind of reading, but, nevertheless, his text became theimmediate axis for all my reﬂections. ‘‘Dread?’’ Yes, ‘‘dread’’ (strictly speaking, I donot experience emotions other than in quotation marks). If I could speak aboutdread then I would say that I am less frightened by the tragic content of the bookthan by the will to create tragedy, which can be sensed in the author himself.Hegel, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, whom we should think about every second195353while reading this, were no less tragic but the tragic thought of humanity of thetime had something of the delight of discovery in itself. This is apparent in Scho-penhauer and palpable and childlike in Nietzsche. Camus is cold.The hell of this book is disturbing because it is cold. And even moredisturbing because this is intentional. It would seem that there is nothing moreunjust than these words because it would be hard to come by a work that is morehuman or has a more noble intention, one that is more ardent in its preoccupationwith man. The mortal coldness is caused by the fact that Camus forbids himselfeven the pleasure that understanding the world gives. He wants to deal with painalone, he discards the delights of the doctor who is pleased with his diagnosis.Camus wants to be ascetic. His desire for tragedy has its roots in the fact that for us,today, tragedy and greatness, tragedy and profundity, tragedy and truth have be-come synonyms. Which means that we do not know how to be great, profound, orreal other than tragically.Perhaps this is one of the most salient features of our thinking during thespace of the past century. On the one hand, we have matured to the point wherewe no longer take any pleasure in our truth. On the other hand, we are set ontragedy and we seek it relentlessly, like a treasure. It is not the Old World monoto-nous in its unhappiness that has become more tragic, but man. And here we reallyshould start to worry because if we do not stop bending over the abyss and evokingthe demon out of nothingness, he will ﬁll all the nooks and crannies of our being!The world will be as we want it to be. So if God in heaven exists and if he is, inaddition, a merciful God, let him not allow us ‘‘to have bad dreams’’ because ‘‘thatis not good, nor can it lead to good.’’What do I have to say about the moral of ‘‘The Rebel’’?This is a work with which I would like to agree with all my heart. Thepoint, however, is that for me, conscience, the individual conscience, does nothave the power that it has for him as far as saving the world. Don’t we see again andagain that the conscience has almost no voice in the matter? Does man kill ortorture because he has come to the conclusion that he has the right to do so? Hekills because others kill. He tortures because others torture. The most abhorrentdeed becomes easy if the road to it has been paved, and, for example, in concentra-tion camps the road to death was so well trodden that the bourgeois incapable of54Volume 1killing a ﬂy at home exterminated people with ease. What disturbs us today is notthis or that issue, but, how should I say this, the dissolution of the issue in thehuman masses, its destruction by the actions of people.I kill because you kill. You and he and all of you torture, therefore, I torture.I killed him because you would have killed me if I had not. Such is the grammar ofour time. It follows from this that the spring of action is not housed in the humanconscience but in the relationship that is formed between it and other people. Wedo not commit evil because we have destroyed God in ourselves, but because Godand even Satan are unimportant if a deed is sanctioned by another man. Nowherein Camus’s entire book will one ﬁnd this simple truth: that a sin is inverselyproportionate to the number of people who give themselves up to it and thisdevaluation of sin and conscience are not reﬂected in a work whose aim is tomagnify them. Following in the footsteps of others, Camus removes man from thehuman mass and from his coexistence with other men, confronting the individualsoul with existence, which seems a little like taking the ﬁsh out of the water.His thought is too individualistic, too abstract. It seems to me that this raceof moralists has been suspended in a void for a long time. If you want me not to killand not to persecute, do not try to explain to me that rebellion is an ‘‘afﬁrmation ofvalues.’’ Try rather to ease the network of tensions that have arisen between me andothers. Show me how not to succumb to it. Conscience? It is true that I have aconscience, but, as with everything else in me, it is something of a half-conscienceand a not-quite-a-conscience. I am half-blind. I am careless. I am any old way.Camus, an aggressive connoisseur of the lower world, one of those who was able torender best the gap existing in our incomplete humanity—even he seeks salvationin sublime formulas.Why, when reading the moralists, do I always have the impression that maneludes them? The moral seems powerless, abstract, and theoretical to me, as if ourreal existence came to life somewhere beyond it. I ask: is it Camus himself who isspeaking to me in this book or a certain school of moral thought that has arisen onFrench soil by the collective effort of the various Pascals? Then they apply thisinstrument, improved and sharpened, to me and others? Isn’t this a rather spe-cialized moral? A somewhat overwrought moral? I would say that it is excessivelyprofound! Excessive? Oversized? The moral being not only the work of peoplewith an especially subtle feeling of profundity, but also, of people who perfect one195355another in that moral. Their thought is only superﬁcially individualistic. It isconcerned with the individual, but it is not the product of an individual.Camus’s passion often destroys this skeleton and then I can breathe. Never-theless, that inﬂated conscience that he serves me, that ﬁnal and cosmic con-science disturbs me. How does one revive morality? How does one free it from thistheoretical aspect? How does one make it reach me, man? Camus tried in vain todeepen my conscience. My problem is not the improvement of my conscience, itis, above all, a question of how far my conscience is mine. For the conscience that Iwield is a product of culture and culture is something that has come from thepeople, yet it is not at all identical with man. Here I would like to say: whenapplying this collective product to me, do not treat me as if I were a self-sufﬁcientsoul in the cosmos. The road to me leads through other people. If you want tospeak to me effectively, never speak to me directly.The loneliness emanating from Camus worries me no less than dry Marxistcollectivism. The more genuine the values of that book, the more it disturbs me. Iadmire, I agree, I endorse, I support, but at the same time, I am skeptical about myown afﬁrmation.And I go in that direction not because I want to but because I must.
V
Saturday
Yesterday at Go´ ska’s garden party petites tables thé dansant, I bragged to thehigh heavens about my genealogical tree and I did it right in front of all present,ﬁrst loudly and coarsely, then feebly, then once again brazenly and in a stentorianvoice, then deviously and round and round, then charmingly, passionately, scien-tiﬁcally, and so I bragged until ﬁnally Hala and Zosia exclaimed with an artiﬁcialyawn: For God’s sake, stop being tiresome, no one cares about all that anyway!
Sunday
When they cried out, I said: Imagine! Why, everybody knows I’m no count,yet a few years ago I pronounced myself a count in the Café Rex, where I go everyevening, and for a while I would be summoned to the phone with a ‘‘Conde56Volume 1Gombrowicz.’’ This only lasted a while because my friends from the Café Rex gotahold of a copy of Dostoyevski’s The Brothers K, where they read that every Poletraveling abroad is a count.I had barely said this when one of those present uttered: What a mania youhave, what a desire for endlessly compromising Poles in front of foreigners! Ha! Isaid. I am not doing this to compromise anyone but because I enjoy it.At that, Ira, Maja, and Lusia cried out in unison: Oh, Witold, pardon us,but surely you are not going to try to convince us that a person such as yourself, aperson of your caliber, advocates such nonsense! And Fila chimed in: After all, youare a writer and that means more than if you were a count.Then . . . Then . . . Then . . . I looked at them strangely with my poor beggar’s look of self-revelation andindigence and said honestly, barefoot style: I prefer to be considered a count toutcourt than to be considered a count of the ﬁne arts, a marquis of the intellect, or aprince of literature. And they cried out in chorus: What games you play!
Monday
These exchanges at Go´ ska’s remind me of an experience at the Sigis-munds’. Yes, yes, that evening I did a good job of promoting myself. I had arrivedlate, as the evening was already at its apogee, and, having arrived, I sat down in aside room to talk to Christine, Yolanta, and Irene. My appearance did not gounnoticed and two, then three, persons joined us, and in a moment, practicallyeveryone else was there, the entire group of Poles, curious, thirsty, attentive, listen-ing with rapt attention to my words, which were, ah, rather careless but sharp anduttered with checked emotion. What was I talking about? I spoke, as this resultedfrom the course of our little talk, about the Faustian and Apollonian concepts ofman and about the decisive role of the Baroque in modern times. I spoke with thatinternal, noble tremolo of brilliance that aggressively imposes its own higher pur-poses upon everyday life.My severity (‘‘No, don’t say that!’’) combined with the mystery (‘‘What isanxiety?’’) and the sureness of a spiritual leader (‘‘Behold the way, it is along this195357line, this crooked line, that we must travel!’’). The lights were dimmed. At onepoint, my audience, mesmerized by my murky brilliance, began to demand that Itell them what art is and on what art is based. What, after all, is art? These questionsjumped all over me like dogs, like the dogs that once jumped all over me years agowhen I drove up to the manor in Wsola. I replied:—Now, that I can’t tell you!—That is something I could tell only to a person of equal rank. In thisgroup, I could give the answer to only one person.—Who is that? they asked.—I could say it only to her—I replied, pointing to one of the ladies—only toher because she is a duchess!
Tuesday
This scene at the Sigismunds’ brings to mind more painful and ratherrecent memories. . . .At supper at the Xs’ something strange came over me!Could it be that they were my social superiors? I believe not. This was oneof those Argentine families from the so-called oligarchy, which had been intro-duced into the international aristocracy through marriages with the Castellanes,Buccleuch-et-Queensberrys, Wuringbrand-Stuppachs, and Brancacio-Ruffanos.Yet even if I had acknowledged the superiority of these dignitaries, where was myartist’s advantage? The subtlety and reﬁnement of taste that would have compelledthem to respect me!Instead, something else happened. . . .Instead of walking into the salon effortlessly, I walked in shyly. It is possiblethat for one split second I allowed them to appeal to me. That was enough!Instantly that other I of mine, that I of the poor café, the I afﬁliated with the triﬂesof inferior poets and even common fruit vendors, immediately my entire drab andsorry inelegance rushed in. How ghastly! I was turned into pulp. For a while I sat insilence but, then, suddenly, I began to try!Ah yes, I began to converse and I tried, I tried to be casual, elegant, I tried tobe pleasant. . . .My entire world came crashing down around me! Everything that had58Volume 1been won with such great effort over the years fell in ruins! Where was mypride? My intelligence? Maturity? Scorn? Everything was lost but you were trying,yes, trying, trying, kneeling before the god whom you had overthrown a thou-sand times!After leaving this bathhouse, I ran out into the empty streets of the city, intothe night, to my inferior café in order to be able to tell a few of my dear acquain-tances and companions who were throwing dice and drinking Toro wine:—I am just getting back from so and so’s. . . .
Wednesday
This reminds me of something else, something more distant.Before the war. The Café Ziemia ´ nska in Warsaw. Haze. A table of youngwriters and poets. The avant-garde. The proletariat. Surrealism. Socrealism. Freeof superstitions. They say things like: The idiotic snobbery of the epoch of theexpiring bourgeoisie! Or: The ridiculous racial prejudices of feudalism!I sit down and immediately emphasize, just in passing though, that mygrandmother was a cousin of the Spanish Bourbons. After saying which, I politelypass them the sugar. But not to Casimir (who ruled them because he was the bestpoet), but to Henry (who had a higher social standing because his father was acolonel). When the discussion begins, however, I take Stefan’s side, because he isfrom a landowning family. Or I say: Sta´ s, poetry is poetry, but I advise you, ﬁrst andforemost, do not be provincial! Or: Art is a ﬁrst-rate heraldic phenomenon! Theylaugh, yawn, or protest but I keep on doing this for months, for whole years with theresolute consistency of the absurd because it is deﬁnitely not worth the effort.—‘‘What boredom! What idiocy! What cretinism!’’ they shout, but slowly, one afteranother, they submit: one ﬁnally blurts out that his grandfather had a villa inKonstancin, another lets it be known that his grandmother’s sister was ‘‘from thecountry,’’ and another draws his coat of arms in jest on a piece of tissue. Socreal-ism? Surrealism? The avant-garde? The proletariat? Poetry? Art? No. A forest ofgenealogical trees and we under them, sitting in their shade.The poet Broniewski said to me:—What are you doing? What kind of diversion is this? You have infectedeven the Communists with your coats of arms!195359Thursday
I found myself in Argentina without a penny, in very difﬁcult circum-stances. I was introduced into the literary world and it was up to me to win thesepeople with intelligent behavior. Instead I offered them genealogy and made themsmile indulgently.That passion, that stylizing, the most idiotic madness possible! That genea-logical mania which is ruining me, which is costing me a social career! If only Ireally were a snob. But I am not. I have never even made the slightest effort to ‘‘bein society’’ and ‘‘society’’ bores, even disgusts, me.What inclines me to recall these memories? What? Armorials. I was toldthat someone in Argentina had the intention of publishing a special armorial foremigrants. An émigré armorial: the height, the masterpiece of our absurdity. Yet, inspite of this, if this book does appear, it will be one of the most real to have beenborn among us because all these things have not come to an end, not in me or inmany other Poles. Wars and revolutions, demolished cities, millions dead, ide-ologies, have steamrollered over us but our meadow blossoms as it did in the pastwith the myths of armorials, our imagination has remained true to our old love: ourlove of counts. And there isn’t a monstrosity around that this honeysuckle will notentwine with its sweet tendrils. Not long ago I heard the most upstanding womanin the world tell, with tears in her eyes, how the Germans tortured X to death inPoland. But I knew why she was telling this story. I waited for her like a cat waitingfor a mouse until I ﬁnally heard what I knew was inevitable:—Please do not besurprised that I am upset by this, but we were actually related, my mother wasprimo voto. . . .Admit that for this madness of yours there is no pretext that is too bloody.Don’t lie, admit that to this day, even though you have been thrown out ofsalons, you recite a litany of high-sounding names.Why are you blushing? Why do you grow furious and protest that you havealready outgrown this when you know darn well that you have not, that this is stillin you.In that case, if you are ﬁlled with this, if this is in you, how can you aspire toa real existence? To a real life? The hierarchies, myths, and honors that arose inyour former quarter-world and are dead today—because that fragment of being60Volume 1from which they arose has already vanished—continue to veil our existence and itis to these dead gods that we secretly pay our ridiculous homage.Enough, enough. Why am I talking about you? It would be better if I talkedabout myself. Listen to my story. For me, the aristocracy was one of those immaturedisturbances, those monstrous, green attractions (I did not know whether they wereborn of me or whether they were imposed on me) with which I did battle inliterature and even more in everyday life. As is always the case with such an imma-ture mythology, it seemed incredibly easy to vanquish so that it was only when Ilooked at it a little more deeply that a more precise accounting of the conscienceshowed its entire rapacious indestructibility. As for me: couldn’t I simply despisesnobbery and stand it on its head, dressing myself in those ready-made phrases thatwait for each of us in such circumstances: ‘‘No, this does not appeal to me, a title hasno meaning, it is the worth of man that is important, no, who would believe in suchridiculous misconceptions!’’ In saying this, I would not be lying insofar as this reallywould be in keeping with my reasoning, which is rather progressive and launderedof all that immemorial stupidity. Yet, even while being the truth, it would be thetruth only to a certain extent and this understanding of the issue is not, in myopinion, adequately intelligent. On the contrary, it testiﬁes to a superﬁcial under-standing because the power of all immature mythology is based on the fact that itgives us trouble even though we may not acknowledge it and know that it is absurd.It is enough to have a real full-blooded duke approach a mature person whoproclaims his freedom from all bias for all of his ‘‘equality’’ to become very indus-trious, forced, ha, he has to be very careful not to tumble into inequality! If you mustprotect yourself from it, then this is proof that something does indeed exist! Thingsdo not always work out as smoothly as democratic decency would like.And it is not difﬁcult to understand why even those who consider themselvesmoderns must be respectful of hierarchy. Is it not because, even though the marquisdoes not appeal to you, he nevertheless appeals to others and you must be respectfulof others? It will not be easy for you to treat someone before whom others bow as anequal. In vain will you secretly consider them fools. This is how immaturity alwaysﬁnds its own people and is supported. But one could also say that, while rejectingthe value of the individual aristocrat, we are not, however, insensitive to the fact thathe is the product of centuries of luxury (for which we all long), that he is apersoniﬁcation of riches, freedom from care, liberty, that he has been shaped by a195361milieu that, justly or unjustly, had extricated itself from life’s poverty. The oldaristocracy is not distinguished by its strong points. These are often badly brought uppeople. Their minds are not too sharp and they can be ﬂabby, repugnant characters.They possess lousy aesthetics and rather doubtful charm. Their servants are gener-ally superior to them even in manners. But the foibles of the aristocracy are theresult of the life it leads, they are testimony to its standard of living and it is thisdelicate standard that we adore despite the moral and aesthetic nature of thephenomenon. One could also add that the aristocracy attracts and captivates, as doall hermetic, exclusive worlds, which have their mystique. The aristocracy lurespeople with its mystique, which ﬂickered and gleamed to Proust as much in thelittle group of les jeunes ﬁlles en ﬂeur as in the salon of Madame de Guermantes.Moreover, a summary resolution of the matter of snobbery with a fewpseudomature phrases does not speak well of the person who defends himself thisway and I had to look for a different way out, but how? I really do not know if I willnot be taking advantage of the situation by reopening my book of reminiscences.. . . Yes, yes! Naturally I could not allow the Rothschilds, the Faucigny Lucinges,the old Duchess, the wife of Francis, or Eddy Montague Stuart to have the upperhand! I had to defend myself, oh yes, if I wanted to mean anything at all in culture,I had to shatter the count and ducal zodiacs in my heavens! But how? I know ofonly one cure for these illnesses: candor. Secret illnesses are cured only by opendiagnosis. It was not that when I met the old Duchess at a reception in her home,she dominated me thoroughly with, it seems, that wild sophistication of limbs, butthat I was ashamed to admit this. It was this discretion that was my defeat! On theday I dared announce my weakness for all to hear, the chain binding me to thatfetlock was cut away. I remember it as clearly as anything. It was years ago inStockholm, where I accidentally met Duke Gaetano, who with his sister, Paulinade Anticoli-Corrado, the Marquessa Pescopagano, lived at Oppedheimherr’s. Ohyes, there for the ﬁrst time, I ﬁgured out my approach to the aristocracy.The Prince and my late father had been on intimate terms and perhapshad even been distant relations. Upon ﬁnding out who I was, he asked that I jointhem for coffee every day after dinner. I have already mentioned that I am not adenizen of salons and that my sensitivity in regard to the aristocracy manifests itselfonly in that its superiority irritates me no end. The visits at Duke Gaetano’s,therefore, were not really something I wanted to accommodate and they soon62Volume 1became a real burden because the most brilliant cream of haute société frequented his premises and the genre was born which annihilated me. I was without a doubtinsufﬁciently initiated into the earthly stratum of Durchlaucht, not at all versed inthe interfamilial connections of the reigning families, and deﬁnitely inadequatelyau courant with the gossip and the tittle-tattle that was the prey of this elegance andthat constituted this elegance. O with what delight I would have confessed myinferiority and my constricted throat to bring the matter to a head in broad day-light! Yet I knew these hierarchies rely on the fact that they are unprofessed: thissuperior world possesses the power of appeal because everyone behaves as if theywere not trying to appeal to anyone, as if the constant and endless attempt toappeal were not its own most essential content. The superior world does not allowitself to be grasped in its real meaning and this creates its impregnability. ThePrince and his entire retinue treated me as if no one knew that they were honoringme by their treatment. . . .Yes, it is impossible to smash, to destroy the salon because the salon imme-diately throws all those who are not of the salon out its doors. Because of this, I hadto act slyly. I won my ﬁrst victory when, looking at myself in the mirror, I turned tothe Prince and asked him if I were distinguished enough (Croyez-vous que je suisassez distingué?).My question was ﬁrst treated as a joke. But I repeated it again in a way thatleft no doubt as to its being a joke!My second question was followed by a moment of slight panic, exactlybecause distinction is its main assignment and it pretends that it knows nothing ofthis, it accepts that distinction as something with which all of its habitués areendowed at birth.I then repeated my question again, but this time jokingly, as if I wereamusing myself.After which I asked: Pourrais-je un jour être aussi imposant et aussi distinguéque vous, prince, et vous, madame? Voilà mon rêve! (Will I ever manage to be asimposing and distinguished as you, my Prince, and you, Madame? That is mydream!).This question was even more risky than the earlier one and I was deﬁnitelywalking a thin line. This question put seriously would have been indecent but as ajoke, it would have been even more tactless, close to impudence, and worthy of the195363most severe censure. It had to be put in such a way as to be clear that I really didacknowledge their princeliness (here I paid them homage), but at the same time ithad to contain an element of joy and amusement, a sign that I was amusing myselfwith this situation, that I was toying with them and myself.That is what I had intended to do. Yes, to toy with them: this was the secretmilestone of my undertaking, marking an ultimate and irreversible triumph! But Icould play with them only on the condition that I was capable of playing withmyself, with my shyness and with my awkwardness before them. Only this kind ofdouble-edged play could assure them and me some distance in the face of thisprovincial, bah, crude truth that I revealed to them. Gaetano understood. He hadgrasped both my honesty and my play. The game appealed to him exactly becauseit introduced him to the bloody, cruel, yet masked meaning of the aristocracy.Slowly he allowed himself to be pulled into this game, which on my part meant amore and more distinct accenting of the differences between us. This way I wasable to deprive these aristocrats of all their masks imperceptibly, undress them, andprevent Aristocracy from hiding its true essence. After a little while, he allowed meopenly to delight in them and Gaetano initiated me into his family tree in order toimpress me. Raising his cuff, he allowed me to be annihilated by his fetlock, asreﬁned as the best wine. I, on the other hand, delighted in the game, amused that Iwas delighting. . . .Of course, this was the only episode that liberated a ﬂash of style in anovercast and uneventful sky. Shortly thereafter I left Stockholm and the scrambleddregs of life washed over my momentary victory. Years later in Paris, at my AuntFleur’s, when I met the Prince again, his Highness, forgetful of our games, wasonce again as hermetic as a bottle of old cognac. Nevertheless, it is from Stock-holm that the secret work of my spirit dates, work that aimed to tame the tiger ofaristocracy. From that moment on, I began to evolve a manner of being thatdepended on liberation through exposition. From then on I entered the half-worldof the counts with some liking and took part in their mass, rendering them duehomage and completing the ceremony in celebrating the holy ritual until demo-cratic wisdom was dumbfounded and shocked by the sight of an intellectualtransformed into a fop. But what do you know about a triumph that allows one todelight in one’s own immaturity and that is simultaneously its liberation andovercoming. Have you tasted the divinity of opposing the ﬁctional, countlike,64Volume 1imagined values to the real and brutal values of life (such as health, reason,character) whose only meaning derives from the fact that they make up the pureplay of hierarchy and value making? Come on now, do you know what it is to standstubbornly by your own reality, just as it is, against all the protests of your mind? Doyou know the madness of delighting in the absurd? Ha, if I kneel before princes it isnot to surrender to them . . .
Kneel, Richard, to become something higherRise, Sir Richard and a Plantagenet . . .
Kneeling before princes, I, a Plantagenet, revel in them, myself, and theworld. They are not my princes. I am the prince of these princes!(Why did I write this?I have a method in mind.Pay a little attention to my method and try applying it to explode othermyths.)
Saturday
Unfortunately, it is certain that the psychological evolution of this genera-tion has chosen an entirely different direction than the one that I propose. Here is ageneration of impoverished and serious workers, laboring to satisfy their elemen-tary needs, a drab generation of laborers and bureaucrats while I am the mouth-piece of luxury, amusement, almost play.Will the drabness dim all the light of existence? I do not believe that I willever be understood by these engineers. The future will show who was profoundand who was superﬁcial. Is not play also a basic need? Don’t the young people ofthe proletariat smile before they get harnessed to the treadmill and are constrainedby their work?
VI
Wednesday
Jan Winczakiewicz’s article in the September issue of Kultura about Bal-i´nski, Lecho ´ n, ©obodowski, and Wierzy ´ nski. They ﬁgure in the Anthology that Dr.195365Stanis™aw Lam has prepared under the categorical title of ‘‘The Most OutstandingÉmigré Poets.’’Winczakiewicz’s review contains only one truth and that is why it strikes soforcefully. If the author were not a poet, full of cultured bows and delicacy forPoetry, I would not call it devastating. But the point is that all of the somewhat old-fashioned gallantry with which Winczakiewicz kisses the ﬁngertips of the rhymedMuse was incapable of stiﬂing the moan in him, which I share: Why does thissmell of the attic? ‘‘These four poets gaze into the past. More: in looking into thepast, they see with the eyes of the past. And still more: even while observing currentevents, they persist in seeing with the eyes of the past.’’What a shame! If it were just a matter of ordinary poems, then no big deal,but these are ‘‘wonderful,’’ ‘‘outstanding’’ poems that arouse so much of our admi-ration, so at least let us not allow them to compromise us. Yes, it would be better ifthe four distinguished faces did not look out at us as if from an album of old familyphotographs. These adored volumes should not be albums of dried autumn leaves.Où sont les neiges d’antan? What are these four subtle princes of our dreams ravingabout, what sort of canticle is their maudlin harp strumming? Oh, that canticle isreally a lullaby! Go to sleep, go to sleep. . . .I am by no means attacking the four prominent poets (it is difﬁcult, asWinczakiewicz writes, for them to change their eyes). I am attacking our admira-tion. Où sont les neiges d’antan? This logic, which urges émigré poetry to be apoetry of remembrances, pity, retreat, escape, or, at best, noncontemporaneity, thislogic is something so dialectically and historically logical that it almost gives you asock in the jaw. What else has been left to us except the subtle perfume of memory?Isn’t it historically justiﬁed and recorded in the tomes of Marxist-Leninism that thepoetry of the expiring social strata has to be the poetry of yesterday? Let us, there-fore, get into the coach of these four historically justiﬁed poets and let us drivealong with them toward those groves of bygone nightingales and bygone roses,toward old-time postcards, gallant swains, and grandmother’s autograph book. Oùsont les neiges d’antan? It is in vain that Polonists such as Mr. Weintraub try tocheer us up by saying that Wierzy ´ nski is seeking new means of expression and thathis rhythm has become ‘‘freer,’’ and his lyricism more direct and toned down.Unfortunately it is not just a matter of rhythm or a louder or less voluble lyricism,but of one’s spiritual predisposition, of the tuning, not of the harps, but the harpists.66Volume 1Où sont les neiges d’antan? I do not agree with Winczakiewicz when hesays that it is romanticism that forces them to avoid the present day and that theiranti-intellectualism is the reason for their helplessness in today’s antiromanticworld, in which there is room only for intellectual poetry. No. The day, no, I amwrong, the night that we are living is ﬁlled to the brim with a romanticism that hasthe force of a thousand Byrons. There has never been such a storm in the tor-mented womb of humanity, our ocean is roaring and breaking itself against crags.Even I am inclined to say that the miracles of this threat are not alien to the fourhistorically justiﬁed bards about whom I am speaking. Yet they cannot accommo-date this beauty in their Poem, in the Poem, which evolved in bygone, prewartimes and this beauty neither strays into their metaphor nor ﬁts into their style.How the naïveté of their faith in Poetry and in the Poet, their cult of thepoetic form, and their loyalty to all the ﬁctions that a poetic milieu creates haveavenged themselves on these people! Today’s poet ought to be a child, but acunning, sober, and careful child. Let him write poetry, yet let him be capable ofrealizing its limitations at all times. Let him be a poet, but a poet prepared at alltimes to revise the relationship of poetry to life and reality. Let him, while being apoet, not stop being a man even for an instant. Let the man refuse to subordinatehimself to the ‘‘poet.’’ The naive Skamander school of poets, whose sole ambitionwas to write ‘‘beautiful poems,’’ was not able to assure this self-sneering, self-ironical, self-despising, self-distrusting attitude. Today when Lecho ´ n should berenewing and reforming the poet Lecho ´ n in himself, where is his point of refer-ence, where is that something that would allow him to at least risk some sort ofchange? He is afraid to move even one comma in his work, because, who knows,he may stop being a poet then and his poems will be less beautiful poems? Howcan this Lecho ´ n turn against the poet-Lecho ´ n if Lechón is, as we have read,‘‘altissimo poeta,’’ and if poetry has become his profession, his social position andspiritual stance? How does one then go about destroying such a happily arrangedharmony with the reader?In these four historically justiﬁed poets, who were given to us in order thatwe could admire them and, in admiring them, feel the delight of dying andpowerlessness, the problem is not a lack of form, it is a lack of distance to form.Free in the face of the world, they are inhibited only on one point: that of poetry. Othat awful, that constricting ‘‘I am a poet,’’ said with the solemnity of a holy195367initiation, cuts them off from all beauty, which is born in the undergrowth of lifeand strikes at hallowed forms. Every once in a while, striking a hard blow at theirown stiffness, they introduce some sort of terrible innovation, a new rhyme orassonance, and that’s it.The artist who realizes himself inside art will never be creative. He mustremain on its peripheries where art meets life, where unpleasant questions such asthe following arise: How much of the poetry that I write is conventional, and howmuch of it is truly real? How much are those who adore me lying and how mucham I lying when I adore myself as a poet? When I posed a few such questions in thearticle ‘‘Against Poets,’’ questions that were not at all complicated, whose onespeciﬁc property was that they had nothing at all to do with rhymed speech butwith poetry’s link to reality, it turned out that no one understood a thing, and thosewho understood least were the poets. One aspect of this religion, which can befound in others, too, is that it does not allow for doubt, it does not want to know.Enough. Why am I taking it out on poets? I will let you in on the reason for mybenevolent cruelty: I know that the poet can bear just about anything and will notfeel offended on the condition that you acknowledge that he is a poet. And here Ican give them full satisfaction and can say a hundred times, yes, they are poets,outstanding poets and even, as the Anthology will have it, the most outstandingpoets (I have nothing against this).But you, people, be on guard against their historically justiﬁed twilight. Donot allow yourself to be drawn into the little game which consists of their ‘‘singing’’and your admiring. Review your platitudes. Sometimes we admire because wehave grown accustomed to admiring and also because we do not want to ruin theparade. Sometimes it also happens that we admire out of delicacy, so as not to hurtanyone. Just in case, I advise you: let us strike at them hard to see whether or notthey tumble over. For that blow may free the modern day in us and will give us akey to the future. Idiots! Why do you allow history to impose poets upon you? Youalone must create them, them and history.
Friday
I went to the fashionable store Ostende and bought a pair of yellow shoes,which turned out to be too tight. So I went back to the store and exchanged this68Volume 1pair for another in exactly the same style and size and identical in every otherrespect and they turned out to be equally tight.Sometimes I amaze myself.
Saturday
X, his wife, and Mr. Y, who is very active in the Argentine Pólonia, relatedthe latest gossip. Apparently at one of the organizational meetings of some group,my name was submitted for membership, at which time the chairman or somesuch person jumped up and roared that they had no room for such a degenerate! Ata meeting of another such committee, my ‘‘cooperation’’ was voted undesirable.May God be with them. Even if they sent me a delegation with ﬂowers andmusic, I would not cooperate with committees that bore me to death, nor would Iaccept a chairmanship because, being a serious person, I would not make a goodﬁgurehead. These little games with chairmen, committees, and sessions are goodfor Sonntagsjägers, but not for a laborer toiling on the land of native literature andculture, like me. I know that no delegation will harass me because the hatred ofcommittees toward me issues from their very nature and committees as such willalways ﬁght me, even if all their members privately whisper into my ear: Keepscribbling, give it to them! Oh, if only a ﬁre would rain down from the heavens andcleanse the Argentine life of Poles of its excessive kitsch. I can’t understand thesepeople. It is puzzling to me that a man who has passed through the seven circles ofhell, who has experienced a situation that has touched the very depths of his soul,who has ﬁnally exhausted the meaning of battle, pain, despair, faith, and doubt,having landed here in Argentina, joins a committee as if nothing had happenedand begins to recite an immortal, it turns out, platitude. The knowledge of life thatthey gained, that they had to attain, is beside them. They have it in their pocketsbut not in themselves and in the end, even these pockets have been sealed.The childishness of their tone is unbearable. The weekly G™os ( Voice), fortiﬁed in recent years with new writers, has stopped being a terrible rag and hasbeen reborn as a proud and useful ‘‘organ,’’ nevertheless, it is still a gathering ofmaiden aunts and uncles, devoting themselves to all possible precautions so as notto shock their adolescent nieces. This concern for the antediluvian innocence oftoday’s Poles is really moving. Persons who have experienced life at its keenest are195369treated like ﬁfth-grade boarding school girls and only certain subjects, appropri-ately sweetened and toned down, are allowed. Perhaps, however, it is better that theG™os maintains this caution, for if the G™os spoke with its real voice then onewould have to worry that it would blow up that weekly and the entire colony inﬁve minutes. We fear our real voice and that is why we use the G™os that is per-fectly neuter.I am far, however, from ﬁghting this state of things with means that are tooextreme. Occasionally someone, usually the president, treasurer, or secretary,turns to me with an intimate summons to become the scourge of the colony andrun everything into the ground as it should be run down. This role does not appealto me. We will not prove anything by mutually slandering each other and callingeach other hypocrites, idiots, and dolts. We should, however, strive for somethingthat would arouse the consciousness of unreality in Poles, that would awaken anawareness of the ﬁction in which they live, and that would make that awareness inthem a vital organ. One must repeat to them: you are not as you are. You havereally outgrown what you are saying. You act in this way because you are attuningyourself to others. You celebrate because everyone else is celebrating. You liebecause everyone else is lying. Yet you and I are better than the farce in which weare acting. This is what must be said to them until this thought becomes a lifejacket. This type of Ketman* is very much needed. We must feel like actors in abad play who cannot fulﬁll themselves in their limited and banal roles. Thisconsciousness will allow us at least to maintain our maturity until the momentwhen we are able to become more real.I blame no one as it is not the people, but the circumstances, which areat fault.
Thursday
He, Mi™osz, is just like the rest of them (literati of a certain school, raised on‘‘social’’ problems), and experiences strife, torment, and doubts that were com-pletely unknown to writers formerly.
*A reference to Mi™osz’s The Captive Mind meaning to keep silent about one’s trueconvictions.70Volume 1Rabelais had no idea whether he was ‘‘historical’’ or ‘‘ahistorical.’’ He hadno intention of cultivating ‘‘absolute writing’’ or of paying homage to ‘‘pure art,’’ or,too, the opposite of that, articulating his epoch. He intended nothing at all becausehe wrote the way a child pees against a tree, in order to relieve himself. He struck atthat which enraged him and fought that which stood in his way. He wrote for hisand another’s delight and he wrote whatever came to mind.Nevertheless, Rabelais expressed his epoch and felt the impending times.He also created the purest and most enduring art and this happened because byexpressing himself in complete freedom, he also expressed the external essence ofhis humanity and of himself, as a son of the times and the seedbed of the newepoch.Today, however, Mi™osz (and he is not alone) puts his ﬁnger to his templeand ponders: How and what am I supposed to write about? Where is my place?What are my obligations? Am I to immerse myself in history? Or should I perhapsseek the ‘‘other shore’’? Who am I supposed to be? What am I supposed to do? Thewriter ˙Zeromski, bless his soul, used to say at such times: Write what your heartdictates! And this is the advice that rings most true.When will we put an end to the tyranny of the mulches of abstraction in or-der to see the concrete world anew? The power of these philosophized antinomies isso enormous that Mi™osz completely forgets whom he is addressing and imputes therole of defender of ‘‘pure art’’ to me, giving me practically the role of an aesthete.What do I have in common with him? If I oppose schemas which threaten a too topi-cal literature, it is not at all in order to impose another schema. I am not speaking foran eternal art or a pure art, I am only telling Mi™osz that one must be careful that thelife beneath our pen not become transformed into politics, philosophy, or aes-thetics. I do not demand applied or pure art, I clamor for freedom. I demand a‘‘natural’’ creativity, the kind that is the unpremeditated realization of man.But he says: I am afraid, I am afraid that when I move away from History(that is, from the truisms of our day), I will be alone. To which I reply: This fear isindecent and what is worse, imaginary. Indecent because it is, in fact, a resignationnot just from excellence, but also from one’s own truth, just as it is a withdrawalfrom probably the only heroism that makes up the pride, power, and vitality ofliterature. He who fears human scorn and loneliness among people, let him besilent. This fear is also imaginary because the popularity that one gains in the195371service of the reader and the currents of the epoch means only large editions andnothing, absolutely nothing more. Only he who is capable of standing apart frompeople and existing as a separate man and who only later wins two, three, orperhaps ten admirers, only he, my brothers, has overcome the isolation within theestablished boundaries of art.He says (continually held in thrall by that reasoned vision, which is at oddswith the most valuable characteristics of his person): Today we Poles can lookdown on the West and speak to it boldly (and here I cite him verbatim) ‘‘simplybecause our country is the scene of the most important changes that can take placeand in these songs is the ‘song of the future’ which will rise up when Moscow’sreign over nations will come crashing down.’’ I would respond to this with advicethat he apply this thought to Bulgaria or China, which are also in the historicalavant-garde. No, Mi™osz, no history will replace your own personal consciousness,maturity, depth. Nothing will absolve you of yourself. If you personally are impor-tant, then even if you live in the most conservative place on the face of the globe,your testimony about life will be important. No historical steamroller will squeezeimportant words out of an immature people.So all of this becomes difﬁcult, doubtful, dark, and muddled under theinvasion of the complex sophistry of our times, but it can regain its crystallinepurity when we understand that today we do not speak or write in a new andspeciﬁc way but that this is how it has been since the beginning of the world. Noconcepts will replace the examples of the great masters and no philosophy willreplace literature’s genealogical tree, so abundant in names that instill pride.There is no way around it: one can only write like Rabelais, Poe, Heine, Racine, orGogol—or not at all. The legacy of this great race, which was passed down to us, isthe only law that governs me. Yet I am not polemicizing with Mi™osz, who is athoroughbred, I am polemicizing with that horse collar, with that wagon full ofscruples to which the past has hitched him.
Monday
Why didn’t I mention Wittlin when discussing Winczakiewicz’s reviewsince Wittlin’s poems are also included in the anthology?I omitted him because Winczakiewicz also leaves him out claiming that72Volume 1the early Wittlin poems are not representative enough. But I would like to ﬁnishthis up once and for all.If Wittlin had only been the author of the poems from the anthology, Icertainly would have mentioned him as well. Wittlin, however, is an earth-watercreature and the denizen of ten realities: a poet who is a prose writer, a saint who isrebellious, a classic related to the avant-garde, a patriot and cosmopolitan, and asocial activist who is a loner. One of these Wittlins derives, it is true, from Ska-mander and he is burdened to some degree by its legacy, but the remaining nineWittlins pursue that one and demand a revision. This quiet tempest of Wittlinswithin Wittlin, this internal turmoil in a seemingly affable volcano, this tormentedand active humanity of his is not my enemy but my ally. The force of Wittlin’sentire rebellion lies in the fact that he does not want to rebel and if he does so, it isbecause he must. This is why none of us is as convincing as he is and no one else’sword is as capable of reconciling people otherwise ossiﬁed in their prejudices. Iknow this power ﬁrsthand because Wittlin’s introduction to my book is a master-piece of lucid persuasion and generosity, infused with a very modern dynamism.Yet it is exactly because of this foreword that I would gladly attack Wittlin. I wouldstrike at him so that no one could accuse me of sparing him because he defendsand supports me (how destitute are my emotions!).
Saturday
Yes, whatever one says, I still fear these feuilleton writers who try to grow upto my ankles so that they can bury their malicious teeth in them. So what if theyhave lost their bearings? The judgment of a fool about you, even if he is the mostostentatious and monumental archcretin, is not necessarily bereft of meaningbecause the fool’s name is Million. What is more important is that an opinion sostrongly marked by even the most perfect nonintelligence and false from A to Zwith all the aplomb of journalism reaches people who know neither you nor yourbooks and who, in addition, are wanting in the capacity to arrive at their ownopinion of you and your works.When after encountering all these sputterings hot with the desire to ridi-cule, annihilate, discourage readers and inﬂict material and moral harm (all in thedefense of sanctity and ideals), one stumbles onto a decently written article, the195373divine air of pride ﬁlls one’s lungs. Hats off to Ryszard Wraga. I do not demand thathe like my work, but I am grateful that he plays fair. His word does not sneak up tomy face in order to ﬁx it with the mask of an idiot. Well! At last, a decent journalist!If he criticizes my views sharply, he does not, nevertheless, hesitate to admit that, incertain ways, the book exceeds his capacity and that which he cannot understand isdeemed ‘‘great and splendid’’ by others. This honesty is morally valuable. Hisideological reservations do not obstruct his doing justice to me and he even claimsthat ‘‘Sienkiewicz can’t hold a candle to Gombrowicz’’! He describes The Marriageas a ‘‘revolutionary play’’ and even cites ‘‘one of its most devastating scenes.’’I am not hungry for this praise, yet the words of recognition that Mr. Wragabestows upon me are worth their weight in gold because they come from anopponent, an opponent who is able to attain the elegance of objectivity. He iscapable of scorning the advantage resulting from the fact that the reader, who isnot familiar with my work, would be incapable of discovering his eventual distor-tions (in defense of threatened ideals) and falsities (in defense of violated sanctity).Really! One must follow the example of such a worthy publicist. I herebydo this.
Tuesday
This is a speech, delivered to the nation at a banquet in the home of X, atthe end of a.d. 1953.
As the holidays approach, you like to water the ﬂower beds of memories with yourtears and you like to sigh over lost native lands. Don’t be silly or maudlin! Learnhow to raise the burden of your own destiny. Stop your nauseating lamentationsover the lost beauties of Grójec, Piotrków, or Bi™goraj. Know that your homelandis neither Grójec nor Skierniewice, not even Poland itself, and blush with energyat the thought that your country is you! So what if you are not in Grodno, Kutno,or Jedli ´nsk. Has man ever lived anywhere else other than in himself ? You are athome even if you were to ﬁnd yourself in Argentina or Canada, because ahomeland is not a blot on a map but the living essence of man.Stop cultivating pious illusions and false sentiments in yourself. No, wewere not happy at home. Those pines, birches, and weeping willows were reallyordinary trees that ﬁlled you with endless yawning when, bored, you looked at74Volume 1them occasionally through the window. It is not true that Grójec is somethingmore than an awful and provincial backwater in which your drab existenceonce fended for itself.No, these are all lies: Radom was never a poem, even at sunrise! Thoseﬂowers were never wondrous and unforgettable! Grinding poverty, dirt, disease,boredom, and injustice encircled you even then like the howling dogs of remotePolish villages at dusk.I say: Don’t be crybabies! Do not forget that as long as you lived inPoland, not one of you was concerned with Poland because it was an everydayevent. Today, on the other hand, you no longer live in Poland so Poland residesmore forcefully in you and it should be present in you as your deepest humanity,the polished work of generations. Know that wherever the eyes of a young manuncover his destiny in the eyes of a girl, a homeland is born. Whenever anger oradmiration ﬁnd themselves on your lips, whenever villainy is struck a blow,whenever the word of the wise man or Beethoven’s song ignites your soul leadingit into unearthly spheres, whether it be Alaska or the equator, a homeland isborn. On Saxon Square in Warsaw, in Cracow’s marketplace, you will behomeless vagrants, homebodies without a corner, wanderers, hopelessly crudemoneymakers, if you allow pettiness to kill all the beauty within you.One must lament that you are not noble enough and inspired enoughto discover the pathetic meaning of your wandering.Nevertheless, do not lose hope. In this battle for a deeper meaning inlife and its beauty, you are not alone. Luckily you have Polish art at your side,which today has become something more important and more real than ahomeless ministry and ofﬁces bereft of power. Art will teach you profundity. Itslash, both harsh and benevolent, will crack over your heads whenever you beginto fall apart, get slimy, and begin to blubber. Art will open your eyes to the keenbeauty of your day, the magnitude of your task, and it will replace your provin-cial feelings with a new, world-size emotion, in scale with the horizons openingbefore you today. Art will restore your capacity for ﬂight and power so thatpeople will not say of you, in Shakespeare’s words:‘Tis dangerous when the baser nature comesBetween the pass and fell incensed pointsOf mighty opposites.751954
VII
Friday
I appeared at this dancing party (this was on New Year’s Day) at two a.m.having consumed, in addition to a turkey, quite a bit of vodka and wine. I hadarranged to meet with friends but they weren’t there and so I wandered through thevarious rooms until I sat down in the garden where, unexpectedly, a crowd brokeup into pairs and started dancing.This happened because of the music, which was barely audible from whereI sat and reached me only through the dull echo of the percussion instruments or inthe few tones of a lively disappearing melody that barely gave a sign of existence. Tothe heavenly summons of the played fragments, which appeared consistently, al-ways arranged around some sort of inaccessible phrase, responded the playful andviolent, witty and insistent rhythm of bodies, dancing to the bursting point, moretangible, more real than that distant illusion until it seemed that it was not the musicthat was eliciting the dance, but the dance that was drawing forth the music. Yes, onehad the impression that the rhythm here, at the bottom, now too overpowering, wastearing out the outline of the conﬁrming sound there, at the top.What dancing! The dance of bellies, gyrating bald heads, wilted faces, thedance of overworked, ordinary everydayness, kicking up its holiday heels, thedance of drabness and deformity. Which does not mean that these people wereworse than any others, it was just that these were mainly older people and, ul-timately, these were ordinary people together with their own inevitable poverty, apoverty that paraded itself shamelessly in convulsions, which, when deprived ofmusic, were something blasphemously outrageous, terrifyingly pagan, and wildlypromiscuous. It seemed as if they were determined to conquer and possess Beauty,76Volume 1Wit, Elegance, and Gaiety by force and so in releasing their defects, they mutuallycreated a dance, an amused form to which they had no right, a form that was ausurpation of form. Yet this mad clamoring for grace, which reached the highestpitch, suddenly tore that sign of life away from the melody, away from those fewhappy tones which, when washing over the dance, sanctiﬁed it for one moment—after which, there appeared once again that wild, dark, remote, godless working offrenzied bodies, carried away with themselves.The dance, therefore, created the music, the dance conquered the melodywith its violence and this in spite of its imperfection! At the ﬂash of this thought Iwas so deeply moved that of all the thoughts in the world, it was that one that wasthe most important to us, today, the one closest to us, yes, this revelation crouchedbehind that curtain in Valéry’s poem (in Lecho ´ n’s translation, I think), which I hadso fervently recited:
The heavy unﬁnished gate of sleepThe slowly rising curtain of rubies . . .
It was this that was at the bottom of all our tomes, struggles, at the bottom ofour genius and the boldness that reached the heavens. Humanity rushed towardthis idea, that the dance creates the music, with all of its means and became theinspiration and metaphysics of my time. Even I strove to reach it along a spiral orever more narrow loops. Yet it was exactly at this moment that I became devastatedfor I realized that I thought this thought only for its pathos!
Thursday
A bird ﬂies, a dog barks. Instead of saying, ‘‘A bird ﬂies, a dog barks’’ Iintentionally said ‘‘A dog ﬂies, a bird barks.’’What is stronger in these phrases: the subject or the predicate? In ‘‘the dogﬂies’’ is it ‘‘ﬂies’’ that is out of place or ‘‘dog’’? Also: could one write somethingbased on such a perverse association of concepts, at the tongue’s proﬂigacy?
Saturday
A conversation with Karol ´Swierczewski about The Marriage and, at thesame time, a letter from S. with the notiﬁcation that someone in the United States195477desires to produce this play. Also, a letter from Camus with the question, do Ihave anything against his recommending The Marriage to a certain director of atheater in Paris.What should I do? The Marriage without theater is like a ﬁsh without water.Yes, because not only is it a drama written for the theater, it is also, in its intention,the very liberating theatricality of existence. I, however, fear that no one besides mewill be able to direct it and that the production will ﬂop to my great shame, ruiningthe stage career of that work for many years to come.The greatest difﬁculty is the fact that The Marriage is not the artistic expres-sion of some sort of issue or situation (something to which France has accustomedus), but a relaxed outlet for the imagination, an imagination that is striving, it istrue, to move in a certain direction. This does not mean that The Marriage doesnot tell us a certain story: it is the drama of a modern man whose world has beendestroyed and who (in a dream) ﬁnds his home changed into an inn and hisﬁancée into a wench. In an attempt to restore the past, this man pronounces hisfather king and wants to see his ﬁancée a virgin. All to no avail. Not only has hisworld been ruined, he, too, has been ruined and his former feelings have longbeen gone. Yet, on those very ruins, a new world, full of awful pitfalls and anunexpected dynamism, devoid of God, reveals itself to him in the very strangeconvulsions of its incipient Form. Drunk with the omnipotence of his unleashedhumanity, Henry pronounces himself king, God, and dictator and wants, by meansof these new machinations, to force purity and love to revive in him. Yes, yes, hewill sanction his own marriage, he will impose it on the people, and he will forcethem to recognize it! Yet this reality which was created by form turns against himand destroys him.This is the story . . . but it does not exhaust the contents of The Marriagebecause the new world, which appears here, was not foreseen, even by the author.The drama is merely an artistic attempt to get at the reality that the Future con-ceals. This is a dream (about our epoch) that expresses the suffering of our moderntimes, but it is also a dream that is a forerunner of the epoch, it is a dream thatattempts to decipher the times. On the peripheries of the action, the slumberingspirit of the protagonist-artist wants to break through the darkness, this is a dream-battle with the demons of tomorrow, this is a celebration of the holy ritual of theBecoming of the new and unknown. On stage, therefore, The Marriage should78Volume 1become a Mount Sinai, a place full of mystical revelations; a cloud, pregnant witha thousand meanings; a galloping work of imagination and intuition; a GrandGuignol, full of play; a puzzling missa solemnis on the threshold of time, at the footof an unknown altar. This dream is a dream and it moves in darkness, by rights itshould be illuminated only by bolts of lightning (forgive me for expressing myselfin such lofty terms, but otherwise I would not be able to get you to understand howThe Marriage should be staged).If you conceive of The Marriage in this way, as an unburdening of the soul,brimming with the dark foreboding of impending times, as a mass of the future, itshould work pretty well on stage. But don’t forget that this production has to be assensual as it is metaphysical, that is, all the brilliance and horror of unbridled form,the intoxication with the mask, and the exultation in the game for love of the gameshould make it a delight. And don’t forget that its ultimate tragedy hinges onterrifying man, who should see that it is taking on a form that is unpredictable, whoshould see the dissonance between man and form.There is melancholy in giving these tips. In truth, I am not at all certainthat The Marriage will be staged in my lifetime.
Sunday
I would like to describe how I envision the general outlines of the directionof the ﬁrst act.The ﬁrst scene with Henry and Johnny: the nostalgic, crushing melody ofsleep and Henry’s pathos in a void and Johnny’s ‘‘ease,’’ the appalling ease ofyouth. And ‘‘hola’’ as an incantation, which grows of itself and gives birth toexpectation.When his parents show up, Henry takes on the style of a ‘‘traveler,’’ this is atypical scene with an innkeeper. Right after that, there is the violent shouting of hisfather and the entrance of his mother, whose shouting should harmonize with thefather’s shouting. And Henry’s two monologues:
I would seem soBut it’s not altogether certain.
and195479I am unable to speak to themstraightforwardly . . .
like two crescendos. Here Henry begins to feel himself a high priest and the massbegins. From now on he will be both in the action and outside the action. Some-times he will support it ardently as if with the desire to exhaust its meaning, he willaccompany it in intoxication, he will assist from the sidelines, or, for a moment, hewill completely halt it.The dialogues with his parents are of various rhythms and changing moods.These dialogues have to be worked out vocally, like a musical score, and theirtheatricality must be brought out. The ritual of the banquet, the parade in pairs tothe table, is an eruption of the grotesque: here for a moment they have forgottenabout the drama and they have fun.Then Molly appears, spiced with the tormenting mystery of a dream. De-spairing but amused, Henry and Johnny surrender themselves to the lightness andcarelessness, and the rhythm, the rhythm overwhelms them! Then the Drunkardsburst in, conjured up by the ‘‘Pig!’’ that Father has become enamored of and thepersistent leitmotiv ‘‘Porky Molly! Porky Molly!’’ and Henry, on the sidelines,allows himself to be drawn in and conﬁrms, supports: ‘‘A bottle of pig bitters!’’Or, when repeating in an aside the words of the Drunkards (Molly, thepickles! . . . Right in the cruciﬁx!) he does it as if he were assisting in some sort ofritual. When, at one point, he says to himself, ‘‘How much longer can this go on?’’the Drunkard, who seems to break out of his role, answers, ‘‘Not much longernow!’’ and, for a moment, one of the pauses in action, characteristic of The Mar-riage, occurs:
Henry (to the Drunkard): What’s outside the window?Drunkard: Fields, as far as the eye can see.
The desperate need to be untouchable and the wild fear of the ﬁnger of theDrunkard give birth to the royalty of the Father. This ﬁnger ought to be quite largeand repugnant.The introduction of the second main theme into this ‘‘symphony’’ (‘‘Oh,Henry, Henry, Oh, Henry!’’) which opposes with its loftiness the ﬁrst, degradingone (‘‘Pig! Pig! Pig!’’) should sound appropriate, supported by shouts of ‘‘The King!80Volume 1The King!’’ and the appearance of the Dignitaries. Dignitaries should appearwrapped in the miasma of a dream and only gradually should this scene consoli-date itself in its new aspect of the royal court.In the scene with the prayer, Fatherhood takes on a divine character. Godis the father of the Father and this fatherhood torments, imposes itself, suggestswords of faithful submission to Henry. Yet he, who is in a vacuum, does not knowwhat to do with himself. All of a sudden, the light, miraculous word ‘‘Marriage’’falls and the stage brightens: a wedding march, the triumphant swiftness of theﬁnale, the polonaise with which the Father wants to ‘‘enforce’’ reality, which ismarred by the last, short, explosive: ‘‘You pig!’’
Monday
Am I allowed to publish such commentaries to my own works? Am Iperhaps overdoing it? And doesn’t it bore people?Tell yourself that people dream about getting to know you. They desireyou. They are curious about you. Lead them forcefully into your affairs, eveninto those that are of no interest to them. Force them to become interested inthat which interests you. The more they know about you, the more they willneed you.The ‘‘I’’ is not an obstacle in being with people. The ‘‘I’’ is that which theydesire. Make sure, though, that the ‘‘I’’ is not smuggled in like contraband. Ifthere’s anything the ‘‘I’’ can’t stand it’s half-heartedness, timidity, shyness.
Tuesday
How do we differ, Mr. Goetel and I?Goetel says (in his article ‘‘Fatigue’’ in Wiadomo´ sci) that the Poles in exilelive a partial, unreal life and that in order for those Poles to begin really living, theymust recover Poland. He writes that from time to time we are overcome withweariness at the thought of that constant, centuries-long, never-ending struggle forPoland. He claims that the devil of escapism whispers into our ear and suggestsvarious ways to avoid this task, but that there is no escape, there can be no real life195481for us outside of Poland. According to him, there is no other fate for us, no othervocation, no other task, except for this splendid task of recovering Poland.First of all, I ask: Are we so sure and is it so obvious that the life of a Pole inPoland was less half-hearted and less unreal? Was that life also not impoverished,miserable, and narrow? Was it not an eternal waiting for life, which ‘‘begins tomor-row’’? Recall the faces in a Warsaw, prewar tram car. How tired they looked! Howtormented! On those faces you could read the portentous meaning of life, a veryuniversal meaning.Second, I ask: Is it true that the life of a Pole in a foreign land must bedevoid of the most basic content? What did the Catholic Church teach you? Thatyou have an immortal soul, independently of the latitude in which you ﬁndyourself. It taught that wherever you are, you are to concern yourselves withsalvation, with your own and that of your fellow man.My position coincides exactly with that of the Church with the differencethat, instead of speaking about the soul in a religious sense, I would list a fewprincipal human values, such as intelligence, nobility, capacity for development,freedom, and honesty. It would seem from Mr. Goetel’s words that the road tothese values runs only through Poland. I, on the other hand, feel that there is noroad to them, as each of us carries them in himself.And now I arrive at the question, which is a trial by ﬁre, a really demonicquestion: If you were told that in order to remain Poles, you should have to giveup some part of your human value, that is, that you could remain Poles onlyunder the condition that you would become worse as people, somewhat lesscapable, less intelligent, less noble, would you agree to such a sacriﬁce to up-hold Poland?Those of you who have been taught to die will reply in the afﬁrmative. Theoverwhelming majority, however, will answer that such a dilemma could not ariseas Poland is an irrevocable condition of these virtues and a Pole without Polandcannot be a complete man. I, however, will call such an answer the most classicexample of escapism. Here you have it, the answer of the coward who is afraid ofreality because the values of which I speak have an absolute worth and cannot bedependent on anything. He who says that only Poland can assure him wisdom ordignity abandons his own wisdom, his own dignity.82Volume 1I see, too, that I and this Mr. Goetel will never be able to understand oneanother because his concern is Poland and mine is the Poles. Goetel is so weigheddown by Poland that even Conrad’s or Curie-Sk™odowska’s attainments are con-sidered purely for propaganda purposes, that is, how much they can be used topopularize the name of Poland abroad. Goetel appraises the role of ‘‘intellectuals’’with condescension because they cannot be of much help to the Polish ques-tion. Conrad, Curie, and the intellect have all become bugs circling one candle:Poland.What will Mr. Goetel say to this? He will say that I am an escapist, weakling,megalomaniac, (pseudo)intellectual, traitor, coward, and crazy aesthete. Goetelcannot say anything else. Goetel must say this (with the clearest conscience).
Thursday
Language. Not that a person should not make grammatical mistakes, butthe mistake should not degrade. Anyone can make a mistake in writing, even agrammatical or spelling mistake, but some people dress themselves in classic togasand these folks are devasted by a mistake, even a minor one. The writer, on theother hand, who does not want to be too impeccable in articulation can allowhimself frequent stumblings and no one will hold him responsible for those.Therefore, a writer must care not only for language, but, above all, for ﬁnding theright attitude to language, which is to say an attitude that is least inhibiting. It is alousy stylist who allows his words to be used against him. And lousy is he who, likesome women, makes a reputation for himself of being without sin. The least littlesin then becomes a scandal.Writers who delight too much in an alleged precision of style, who try toshock with some sort of nonexistent mathematics of language, who coquet (theschool of Anatole France) with their ‘‘mastery’’: these writers are no longer in tunewith our times. Especially since sybaritism has become unfashionable. A contem-porary stylist must have a feeling for language as something inﬁnite and dynamicthat does not allow itself to be mastered. He will emphasize his struggle with formrather than form itself. His attitude toward the word, as something that eludes him,is one of distrust. This loosening of the bond between the writer and the wordensures a greater boldness in using words.195483The most important thing is that the excess of theory, the conceited ap-proach to style, not take away the word’s efﬁcacy in practice, in life. After all, arttakes place among living, concrete, and, therefore, imperfect people. Today thereis a glut of styles that bore, fatigue, and turn our stomachs because they are the fruitof a creative recipe, the work of an unsocial and poorly brought up people. Theword should be aimed at people not at theories, at people not at art. The language Iuse in this diary is too correct; in my other works, I have more freedom.
Friday
Good Polish literature, modern or older, was not of much use to me anddid not teach me much, and that is because it never dared to see the individ-ual man.The individuum: if it showed up in the pages of Polish literature at all, itappeared pusillanimous, weak, not genuine, always unﬁnished. Polish literature isa typically seductive literature. It strives to lure the individual, subordinate him tothe masses, submit him to patriotism, citizenship, faith, and service. It is a ped-agogical literature and, therefore, it does not inspire trust.Yet I found bad Polish literature to be both interesting and instructive. Instudying the wretched little novels of various spinsters in the Sunday edition ofKurier Warszawski or in reading the novels of German, Mniszkówna, Zarzycka, orMostowicz, I was uncovering reality because these novels unmask, they are trai-torous. This incompetent ﬁction splits at the seams constantly and through thecrevices you can catch sight of all the dirt in those sloppy little authorial souls.The history of literature: yes, of course, but why just a history of goodliterature? Bad art may be more representative of a people. The history of all Polishgraphomania could tell us more about ourselves than a history of all the Mickie-wiczes and Pruses.
Monday
We drove to Tigre in the delta of the Paraná. Our motorboat cruised alongthe dark and quiet surface that ripples through a forest of islands. All is green, blue,pleasant, and fun. We stopped and picked up a young girl who, how should I say84Volume 1this? Beauty has its secrets: there are many such beautiful melodies but only a feware like a hand that strangles. Her beauty was so ‘‘fetching’’ that everyone feltstrange and perhaps even bashful. No one dared betray that he was watching her,even though there was not a pair of eyes that was not casting furtive glances at herluminous being.The girl then calmly began to pick her nose.
Wednesday
Virgilio Piñera (a Cuban writer): You, Europeans, think we are nothing!Never, not for a minute, did you believe that a literature could be born here. Yourskepticism regarding America is absolute and boundless! Imperturbable! Maskedwith hypocrisy, which is an even more deadly variety of scorn. There is somethingunyielding in this scorn! Too bad that we do not know how to respond with a scornequal to yours!Even the best minds here fall victim to attacks of American naïveté. EveryAmerican, even if he has consumed all the wisdom of the world and has examinedall varieties of arrogance, conceals that provincialism somewhere so that it alwaysbursts out in a new, childish whine. Virgilio, I said, don’t be a child. All thesedivisions into continents and nationalities, this is really just a lousy schema im-posed on art. Why, everything you write leads me to believe that you don’t knowthe word ‘‘we,’’ only ‘‘I.’’ Why the division then into ‘‘We, Americans’’ and ‘‘You,Europeans’’?
Thursday
Will I be able to die like others and then what will my fate be? Among apeople ﬂeeing from themselves, I remain ﬁxed on myself. I magnify myself to whatextent? Is this unhealthy? To what extent and in what way is it unhealthy? Some-times I suspect that the act of self-aggrandizement, to which I submit, is not anindifferent matter to nature and that it is a provocation. Haven’t I touched onsomething basic in my very relationship to supernatural forces and will not my fatebe different ‘‘later’’ as a result of the fact that I did not treat myself as others?195485VIII
Sunday
Tragedy.I walked in the rain, hat perched over my forehead, collar raised, hands inmy pockets.After which I returned home.Then I went out again to get something to eat.Then I ate it.
Friday
With the Spanish painter Sanza in Galeon. He came here for two months,sold paintings for a few hundred thousand, knows and values ©obodowski. In spiteof the fact that he has made a ton of money in Argentina, he speaks about it withoutenthusiasm. ‘‘In Madrid, a person can sit at a table in a street café and even thoughnothing speciﬁc awaits him, he knows that anything can happen: friendship, love,adventure. Here you know nothing will happen.’’Sanza’s discontent is quite restrained compared with what other touristssay. These foreigners pouting over Argentina, their lofty criticism and summaryjudgments don’t seem to be of the highest category. Argentina is full of miraclesand magic, but this charm is discrete; wrapped in a smile that does not want toexpress too much. Here we possess decent enough materia prima (raw material)even though we cannot yet afford manufactured products. We have no NotreDame or Louvre, nevertheless, one does often see dazzling teeth, fabulous eyes,and the shape of harmonious, graceful bodies on the street. When from time totime cadets from the French navy visit us, the Argentine woman inevitably goesinto raptures, as if she had seen Paris itself, but then she always says: What a shamethey are not nicer looking. French actresses impress Argentineans with their Pari-sian perfume but they also say: There isn’t a single one with everything in the rightplace. This country, satiated with youth, has a certain aristocratic serenity, speciﬁcto creatures that move easily and don’t need to be shy.86Volume 1I am speaking mainly of the young people because it is characteristic ofArgentina that its beauty is young and ‘‘low,’’ earthy, you will not ﬁnd it in largeramounts in the higher or median strata. Only the common people are distinctive.Only the common people are aristocratic. The young people alone are impecca-ble in every detail. This is a reversed country where the young stripling who sellsthe literary revista has more style than all of its collaborators put together; wherethe mediocrity of the plutocratic and intellectual salons is appealing; and where acatastrophe occurs when one turns thirty—the utter transformation of youth intouninteresting maturity. Argentina, together with the rest of America, is youngbecause it dies young. Yet its youth, in spite of everything, is ineffectual. At theparties here you can spot a twenty-year-old worker who is a Mozart melody, ap-proach a girl who is a Benvenuto Cellini vase, and see how nothing results fromthis meeting of two masterpieces. This then is a land in which poetry does notbecome reality, yet precisely because of that one feels even more strongly its awfulsilent presence behind the curtain.One should not really speak of masterpieces as this word is out of place inArgentina. There are no masterpieces here, there are only works of art. Here notonly is beauty something that is not abnormal, it constitutes the embodiment ofordinary health and average development. It is a triumph of matter, not a divinerevelation. And that ordinary beauty knows that it is nothing extraordinary, which iswhy it does not value itself and is, therefore, an entirely secular beauty, deprived ofgrace. Nevertheless, because it is linked to grace and divinity by its very essence, itis all the more shocking as an abdication.And now:Just as with physical beauty in Argentina, so it is with form. Argentina is acountry of early and easy form: there is not much here of the pain, degradation,dirt, suffering that accompany a form that perfects itself only slowly and with greateffort. Rarely is there a social blunder. Timidity is the exception. Outright stupidityis rare and these people resort to neither melodrama nor sentimentality, to neitherpathos nor buffoonery, at least they never resort to these altogether. As a result ofthis early and smoothly maturing form (thanks to which a child moves with theease of an adult), which facilitates and paves, no hierarchy of values on a Europeanscale has materialized in this country and this, perhaps, may be what attracts memost in Argentina. They are not repulsed, they are not outraged, they do not195487condemn, and they are not ashamed to the extent that we are. They have notexperienced form and they have not tasted its drama. Sin in Argentina is less sinful,holiness less holy, revulsion less repulsive and it is not just the beauty of the bodybut all virtue that is less lofty here and inclined to eat off the same plate as sin.There is something disarming in the air here: an Argentinean does not believe inhis own hierarchies or else he accepts them as something imposed on him. Theresonance of the spirit is not convincing in Argentina, something which Argentin-eans themselves know best and that is why two separate languages exist here: onepublic, serving the spirit which is ritual and rhetoric and another, private onethrough which people make themselves understood behind the back of the ﬁrstone. There isn’t the slightest connection between these two languages and anArgentinean presses a button in himself which turns on the lofty and then pressesanother button, which returns him to his everyday self.What is Argentina? Batter that has not yet become cake, or something that issimply unshaped, or, perhaps, a protest against the mechanization of the spirit, thereluctant, devil-may-care gesture of a man who is removing himself from a tooautomatic accumulation—an intelligence that is too intelligent, a beauty that is toobeautiful, a morality that is too moral? In this climate, in this constellation, agenuine and creative protest against Europe could arise if—if the softness found away to make itself hard or if the indistinctness could become a program, a deﬁnition.
Thursday
My letter to members of the Discussion Club in Los Angeles:
Thank you for your nice Merry Christmas and Happy New Year’s wishes and forthe news that the ﬁrst meeting of the Club was devoted to discussing my works,which delights me. Allow me, dear members, to return the compliment with afew remarks on the subject of the activity to which you devote yourselves, i.e., theart of discussion.I wish to share my reﬂections on this matter with you because it is withgreat pain that I see that discussion belongs to those cultural phenomena thatusually bring us nothing but humiliation and that I would call ‘‘disqualifying.’’Let us think about the source of this venom of ignominy with which discussion88Volume 1plies us. We undertake it assuming that it will throw into relief who is right andwhat the truth is, in connection with which men primo, designate a topic;secundo, deﬁne notions; tertio, take care to articulate with precision; andquarto, take pains to maintain logical argumentation. All this is followed by aTower of Babel, a muddle of concepts, a chaos of words and the truth is drownedin claptrap. How much longer can we maintain that professorial naïveté de-rived from the previous century whereby we can organize discussion. Are therecertain things you still do not understand? Do you need more blather in a worldsick with discussion to understand that gabbing is no bridge to the truth? Doyou want to illuminate your darkness with this candle when not even a light-house can penetrate its walls?If I said that discussion belongs to ‘‘disqualifying’’ phenomena thenobviously I am thinking only of discussion of lofty and isolated issues becauseno one will expose himself to shame and foolishness when carrying on about theways of preparing vegetable soup. Foolishness is a consequence not only of thefact that discussion cannot do its job, it arises primarily because we ourselvesallow for a certain mystiﬁcation that intensiﬁes in proportion to the profundityof the subject. In other words, we pretend before ourselves and others that we areafter the truth, whereas in reality, the truth is merely a pretext for our personalﬂight in discussion, for our, succinctly speaking, pleasure. When you playtennis, you don’t try to convince others that you are interested in anything elsebut the game. Yet when you toss arguments around, you do not want to admitthat truth, belief, worldview, ideal, humanity, or art have become a ball andthat the important thing is who beats whom, who shines, or who will distinguishhimself in the scufﬂe that so nicely ﬁlls out the afternoon.Does Discussion, therefore, serve the Truth? Or does Truth serve Dis-cussion? Most likely it is both one and the other and in this split hides some-thing elusive, something that is the secret of life and culture. Yet a talking manshould know why he is speaking and it is enough to conceal this less serious sideof the discussion and immediately our style gets mendacious, breaks down, andleads us to defeat. Persons who forget about other people and concentrateexclusively on striving for the Truth speak heavily and falsely, their speech isdevoid of life, it becomes not a ball but a saw. But those who know how toliberate pleasure, who treat discussion as both work and play, play for workand work for play, they will not allow themselves to be crushed and then195489the exchange of opinions will sprout wings, ﬂash grace, passion, poetry, and,most important, regardless of the result, will become a triumph. Even absoluteidiocy or lies will not be able to knock you ﬂat on your back if you are able toplay with them.It seems to me that here, accidentally, I have betrayed the greatest andultimate secret of style: we have to know how to delight in the word. If literaturegenerally dares to speak, it is not at all because it is certain of its truth, but onlybecause it is certain of its delight. If, however, dear members, I desire to drawyour attention to this property of discussion, it is because the world has becomemortally and stupidly serious and our truths, which are denied play, borethemselves and through their vengeance begin to bore us. We forget that mandoes not exist only to convince another man. He exists in order to win, to win tohis side, to seduce, charm, possess. Truth is not a matter of arguments. It is onlya matter of attraction, that is, a pulling toward. Truth does not make itself realin an abstract contest of ideas, but in a collision of persons. Being condemnedto read a fair amount of books ﬁlled only with arguments, I know what truthsevered from the person is: a laborious truth. And that is why I turn to you withthe plea: Do not allow an idea to grow in you at the price of your personality.You write that I was the subject of your talk. So I would like to ask: Didyou respect my person? Did your words ring with vibrancy, did you speak aboutme with the ﬂight and passion appropriate to art or did you merely extract somesort of ‘‘views’’ out of me and gnaw on them like a dry bone from my skeleton?You should know that I forbid you to speak about me in a boring, everyday,ordinary way. I staunchly forbid this. I demand a holiday word for myself. Ipunish those who allow themselves to speak about me boringly and wisely. Ipunish them cruelly: I die on their lips and they end up with an oral cavity fullof my dead body.
Monday
Dionys Mascolo: Le communisme (révolution et communication ou la dia-lectique des valeurs et des besoins, Gallimard, Paris, 1953).I assume that I will still have something to say about this important book(important because this is a sophisticated Communism, spiced with all the ﬂavors90Volume 1of the elite, a Communism for the aristocracy), of which I have read barely ahundred pages.But for now:The text creates the strange impression of absolute seriousness and abso-lute childishness. Absolute honesty and absolute mendacity. Absolute knowledgeabout reality and absolute ignorance.Would it not, therefore, be appropriate to say that Mascolo has absolutelyexhausted a certain sense of existence, but that he lacks the sense of another,complementary meaning? This work stands steady, but only on one leg.That is why it often casts a blinding sheaf of light onto the venomousalchemy of current culture and our playing with false cards. Here Mascolo maycome in handy. But he is completely powerless in the face of his own mendacity.This happens because he does not want to be himself, he wants simply to be aninstrument. This is a man who has subordinated himself to his own opinion. Hecannot understand the world because he wants to impose himself on the world andwhat is more, feels that the imposition is the only form of understanding. This is asoul that is insolent by premeditation.This is reﬂected in his style. His language shouts: I am up to par! I am pro-found. I am penetrating. I am conscious and authentic. I am capable of using all theploys, I know all the formulas, you won’t catch me at any type of naïveté. This lan-guage, however, is not personal. It looks as if Mascolo has just ingested the amountof consciousness, subtlety, sharpness, etc., that is in the air, which is to say, the airthat modern intellectualism breathes. He has appropriated all of this and uses it ﬂu-ently, but it is not his property. Nothing is Mascolo’s property because he himself isnot his own property. One could take the ‘‘style’’ of this book and use it against him—it would be enough to put it in another envelope and send it to another address.In this book, where the demon of a Communizing intelligence throwshimself at the cosmos, which is equally demonic and equally abstract, one singletruth is lacking, that is, the modest, warm, intimate truth of the author.
Thursday
Criticism has been a burning issue for me for a long time, perhaps evenfrom my ﬁrst literary contacts with people. Poles are not generally psychologists. A195491Pole is incapable, for example, of correctly judging a man with whom he is talkingor whose book he is reading. I knew that a Pole would not take the trouble toinquire about the point at which my joke becomes seriousness; my irresponsibility,responsibility; my immaturity, maturity. He is incapable of unmasking my game orunderstanding its causes.But of all Poles, the literary critic, that professional evaluator, is exactly thebeing that knows the least about people and, what follows, about literature becausehis intellectual ballast crushes the remainder of the direct, intuitive feelings of aman. Because of this, I knew, when writing Ferdydurke —a book that is unusually difﬁcult and, what is more, is misleading and deceptive—that if I gave myself upinto the hands of these men unarmed, I would be lost.At the same time, I plied myself with a series of questions. Is it okay for anauthor to be unarmed before a critic? Why am I supposed to agree without protest toMr. X’s public assessment of me if perhaps he possesses less knowledge about lifethan I do and certainly has a worse idea of what not his, but my concerns are. Whyshould the opinion of Mr. X, which is really just one more private opinion, be raisedto the level of a verdict by the mere fact that he writes for a newspaper? Why should Ibear this arrogance and impertinence, that hurried sloppiness solemnly called criti-cism? Wouldn’t I be in contradiction with the basic striving of my work, which issupposed to have assured me freedom and sovereignty and granted me a ‘‘surenessof self’’ if I agreed to this dependency on human opinion? But, most of all, I askedmyself (because in Ferdydurke I strove to reveal myself on the broadest scale possi-ble) if it was right that authors should pretend that criticism does not matter to themat all, just as if those verdicts were being decreed on another planet whereas in real-ity we all write for people, their judgment is crucial, and our fear of it dominates us.These questions were all the more painful because I, who was a little-known author and certainly one devoid of authority, wrote a book that was out-rageously bold and provocative, in which I, a young whippersnapper, settled ac-counts with all of culture! My strength, however, lay precisely in the disclosure ofmy weakness. The starting point of the book, the revelation of my own immaturity,was supposed to have been its strong point. I decided, therefore, also to reveal myattitude to criticism and, instead of avoiding this aspect of creativity with a shame-ﬁlled silence, as is usually done, I tried to show as distinctly as I could that my bookwas written in fear and hatred of criticism, with the desire to escape it.92Volume 1Today, naturally, I feel a lot more sure of myself as I am more ﬁrmly rootedin people and I am not so terribly alone as when I approached Kister with my ﬁrstmanuscript. Today I can oppose the opinion of Mr. X, who considers me a half-wit,to the opinion of Mr. Y, who appreciates me. Nevertheless . . .
Sunday
The cold wind from the south swept a mass of hot and humid air out ofBuenos Aires and now it is blowing at a clip, howling, whistling, buzzing andslamming windows, throwing papers into the air at the intersections and causingreal orgies of invisible witches. This pseudoautumn wind grabs me, too, and spursme on into the past. It has the privilege of evoking the past in me and sometimes Isubmit to it for hours, sitting somewhere on a bench. There, blown through andthrough, I attempt something that is beyond my power but nevertheless ardentlydesired: contact with the Witold Gombrowicz from irretrievable epochs. I spend alot of time reconstructing my past: I diligently establish a chronology and stretchmy memory to its limits, looking for myself the way Proust did, but to no avail. Thepast is bottomless and Proust lies. Nothing, one can do absolutely nothing. Yet thesouthern wind, in causing certain upheavals in my organism, creates in me a stateof almost amorous desire in which, desperately losing my way, I attempt to awakenmy old existence in me for just an instant with a grimace.On avenida Costanera, staring at the waves dashed into the air with relent-less fury by the stone masonry of the shore, I, today’s Gombrowicz, summoned thatdistant protoplast of mine in all of his tremulous and youthful vulnerability. Today,the triviality of those events took on (for me who already knew, who was now myown past, the solution to the riddle of that boy) the sanctity of legends about distantbeginnings and today I knew the seriousness of that ridiculous suffering, I knew itex post. I reminded myself, therefore, how one evening he-I went to the neighbor-ing village of Bartodziej to attend a party, where there was a person who trans-ported him-me into raptures and before whom I-he wanted to show off, shine. I-heneeded this. Instead I walked into the salon and there, instead of admiration, I wasgreeted by the pity of aunts, the jokes of cousins, the crass irony of all those locallandowners. What had happened? Kaden Bandrowski had ‘‘run down’’ one of my195493novellas in words that were actually full of indulgence but which categoricallydenied me any talent. That newspaper had fallen into their hands and they, ofcourse, believed it because, after all, he was a writer and he knew what he talkingabout. That evening I did not know where to hide my face.If he-I was helpless in situations like this, then it was not at all because hewas not up to them. On the contrary. These situations were irrefutable becausethey were unworthy of being refuted—they were too silly and frivolous to take thesuffering that they caused seriously. You suffered and, at the same time, wereashamed of your suffering so that you, who at that time could easily handle farmore menacing demons, broke down at this juncture, disqualiﬁed by your ownpain. You poor, poor boy! Why hadn’t I been at your side then, why couldn’t I havewalked into that drawing room and stood right behind you, so that you could havebeen fortiﬁed with the later sense of your life. But I—your fulﬁllment—I was—Iam—a thousand miles and many years away from you and I sat—I sit—here, on theAmerican shore, so bitterly overdue . . . and thus, staring at the water that shoots upfrom behind a stone wall, ﬁlled with the distance of the wind speeding from thepolar region.
Sunday
Today, years later, when I am a lot calmer, less at the mercy and the lack ofmercy of judgments, I think about the basic assumptions of Ferdydurke regardingcriticism and I can endorse them without reservation. There are enough innocentworks that enter life looking as if they did not know that they would be raped by athousand idiotic assessments! Enough authors who pretend that this rape, perpe-trated on them with superﬁcial judgments, any kind at all, is something that is notcapable of affecting them and should not be noticed. A work, even if it is born ofthe purest contemplation, should be written in such a way as to assure the authoran advantage in his game with people. A style that cannot defend itself beforehuman judgment, that surrenders its creator to the ill will of any old imbecile, doesnot fulﬁll its most important assignment. Yet defense against these opinions ispossible only when we manage a little humility and admit how important theyreally are to us, even if they do come from an idiot. That is why the defenselessness94Volume 1of art in the face of human judgment is the sad consequence of its pride: ah, I amhigher than that, I take into account only the opinions of the wise! This ﬁction isabsurd and the truth, the difﬁcult and tragic truth is that the idiot’s opinion is alsosigniﬁcant. It also creates us, shapes us from inside out, and has far-reachingpractical and vital consequences.Criticism, however, has yet another aspect. It can be seen from the author’sside but it can also be seen from the side of the public and then it takes on evengaudier tones of scandal, mendacity, and deception. How do these things look?The public desires to be informed by the press about books that appear. This is thesource of journalistic criticism, manned by people having contact with literature.Yet if these people really had something to do in the ﬁeld of art, if they really wererooted in it, they certainly would not stop at these articles. So, no, these arepractically always second- and third-rate literary ﬁgures, persons who always main-tain merely a loose, rather social, relation with the world of the spirit, personswho are not on the level of the concerns that they write about. This then is thesource of the greatest difﬁculty, which cannot be avoided and from which arisesthe entire scandal that comprises criticism and its immorality. The question is thefollowing: How can an inferior man criticize a superior man, how can he assess hispersonality and arrive at the value of his work? How can this take place withoutbecoming absurd?Never have the critics, at least the Polish ones, ever devoted even a singleminute of time to this delicate matter. Mr. X, however, in judging a man ofNorwid’s class, for example, puts himself in a suicidal, impossible position becausein order to judge Norwid, he must be superior to Norwid but he is not. This basicfalseness draws out an inﬁnite chain of additional lies, and criticism becomes theliving contradiction of all of its lofties aspirations.So they want to be judges of art? First they must attain it. They are in itsantechamber and they lack access to the spiritual states from which art derives.They know nothing of its intensity.So they want to be methodical, professional, objective, just? But theythemselves are a triumph of dilettantism, expressing themselves on subjects thatthey are incapable of mastering. They are an example of the most unlawfulusurpation.195495Guardians of morality? Morality is based on a hierarchy of values and theythemselves sneer at hierarchy. The very fact of their existence is in its essenceimmoral: there is nothing that they have exhibited and they have no proof that theyhave a right to this role except that the editor allows them to write. Giving them-selves up to immoral work, which consists of articulating cheap, easy, hurriedjudgments without basis, they want to judge the morality of people who put theirlife into art.So they want to judge style? But they themselves are a parody of style, thepersoniﬁcation of pretentiousness. They are bad stylists to the degree that they arenot offended by the incurable dissonance of that accursed ‘‘higher’’ and ‘‘lower.’’Even omitting the fact that they write quickly and sloppily, this is the dirt of thecheapest publicism. . . .Teachers, educators, spiritual leaders? In reality, they taught the Polishreader this truth about literature: that it is something like a school essay, written inorder that the teacher could give it a grade; that creativity is not a play of forces,which do not allow themselves to be completely controlled, not a burst of energy orthe work of a spirit that is creating itself but merely an annual literary ‘‘production,’’along with the inseparable reviews, contests, awards, and feuilletons. These aremasters of trivialization, artists who transform a keen life into a boring pulp, whereeverything is more or less equally mediocre and unimportant.A surplus of parasites produces such fatal effects. To write about literature iseasier than writing literature: that’s the whole point. If I were in their place, there-fore, I would reﬂect very deeply on how to elude this disgrace whose name is:oversimpliﬁcation. Their advantages are purely technical. Their voice resoundspowerfully not because it is powerful but because they are allowed to speak throughthe megaphone of the press.What is the way out of this?Cast off in fury and pride all the artiﬁcial advantages that your situation as-sures you. Because literary criticism is not the judging of one man by another (whogave you this right?) but the meeting of two personalities on absolutely equal terms.Therefore: do not judge. Simply describe your reactions. Never writeabout the author or the work, only about yourself in confrontation with the work orthe author. You are allowed to write about yourself.96Volume 1In writing about yourself, however, write so that your person takes onweight, meaning, and life, so that it becomes your decisive argument. Do not writeas a pseudoscientist but as an artist. Criticism must be as tense and vibrant as thatwhich it touches. Otherwise it becomes gas escaping from a balloon, a sloppybutchering with a dull knife, decay, an anatomy, a grave.And if you don’t feel like doing this or cannot do this, leave it alone.(I wrote this after ﬁnding out that the Association of Polish Writers in Exile,which considers criticism especially important to writing, has established an awardof twenty-ﬁve pounds for the best work of criticism. Even though all the awards goon somewhere beyond me, even though this is a dance to which I have not beeninvited . . . hm, who knows, maybe this time? I submit the following ‘‘critical work’’for the prize and highly recommend it to the Committee.)
Saturday
To persons who are interested in my writing technique, I offer the followingrecipe:Enter the realm of dreams.After which begin writing the ﬁrst story that comes to mind and write abouttwenty pages. Then read it.On these twenty pages, there may be one scene, a few sentences, a meta-phor, which will seem exciting to you. Then write everything all over again,attempting this time to make the exciting elements the scaffolding and write, nottaking reality into consideration, and striving only to satisfy the needs of yourimagination.During this second editing your imagination will head in a speciﬁc direc-tion and you will arrive at new associations, which will clearly delineate your ﬁeldof action. Then write an additional twenty pages, constantly heading along thesame line of association, always seeking an exciting, creative, mysterious, revealingelement. Then write everything all over again. By doing this you will barely noticethe moment when a whole series of key scenes, metaphors, symbols (like the‘‘walking,’’ the ‘‘empty pistol,’’ or ‘‘stallion’’ in Trans-Atlantic or the ‘‘parts of thebody’’ in Ferdydurke) create themselves and you have arrived at the appropriatecode. Everything will begin to take on ﬂesh under your ﬁngers by the power of its195497own logic: scenes, characters, concepts, images will demand fruition and thatwhich you have already created will dictate the rest to you.The whole trick, though, is that while surrendering yourself passively to thework and letting it create itself, you do not, even for a moment, stop controlling it.Your rule in this matter is to be: I do not know where the work will lead me, butwherever it leads me, I have to express myself and satisfy myself. When beginningTrans-Atlantic, I hadn’t the slightest idea that it would lead me to Poland, yet whenit happened, I tried not to lie, or, to lie as little as possible, and to exploit thesituation to release energy and participate with relish. All the problems that a workbeing born and blindly creating itself suggests to you—problems of ethics, style,form, intellect—must be solved with the full participation of your most alert con-sciousness and with maximum realism (as all of this is a game of compensation: thecrazier, more fantastic, inventive, unpredictable, irresponsible you are, the moresober, controlled, and responsible you must be).In the end a battle arises between you and the work, the same as thatbetween a driver and the horses which are carrying him off. I cannot control thehorses, but I must take care not to overturn the wagon on any of the sharp curves ofthe course. Where I will end up, I don’t know, but I must get there in one piece.Moreover, I must, when I get the chance, recall the delicious terror of the ride.Finally: out of the struggle between the inner logic of the work and myperson (for it is not yet clear: is the work a mere pretext for expressing myself or amI a pretext for the work), out of this wrestling is born a third thing, somethingindirect, something that seems not to have been written by me, yet it is mine,something that is neither pure form nor my direct expression, but a deformationborn in an intermediary sphere; between me and the world. This strange creation,this bastard, I put in an envelope and mail to a publisher.After which you read in the press: ‘‘Gombrowicz wrote Trans-Atlantic inorder to inform . . .’’ ‘‘The thesis of the drama The Marriage is . . .’’ ‘‘In Ferdydurke,Gombrowicz wants to say . . .’’
Friday
A letter from a stranger, Mr. H. of London. He asks: in my opinion, isn’t acertain Polish diplomat an anti-Semite deserving of censure because in his diary98Volume 1he called a certain Jew a ‘‘rabid skunk’’? I regret that I did not keep a copy of myanswer, which was more or less the following:
‘‘My dear sir, you are completely mistaken. The invective that describes a Jewis ‘mangy dog.’ The words ‘rabid skunk’ are used quite frequently in collo-quial speech to designate Aryans, therefore, even though both words have acommon source, nothing authorizes one to assume that they were used inreference to that person’s Jewish background.‘‘I read the text that you cite a few days ago and the suspicion of theauthor’s anti-Semitism never even ﬂitted across my mind. I must also admit toyou, Sir, that even I—though it is easy to conclude from my literature that Ido not have much in common with anti-Semitism—occasionally let ﬂythe words ‘mangy dog’ when a particular Semite irritates me. This happensbecause I am not a rigid, forced, philo-Semite, but a relaxed one, with all theatavisms, my holy sir, of a Polish squire from the countryside.’’
I assume that this answer will not satisfy my correspondent. Too bad. It istrue that a certain shyness prevents me from writing precisely that which peopleexpect. The incalculable abyss of crimes perpetrated on the Jews has permeatedme through and through forever. However, I preferred not to include that in aletter. I would write it, but in a letter to an anti-Semite. I must also note that thisgrabbing at one’s words is a little unconvincing. There is a scar here, one which isfrivolous exactly because of the seriousness of the tragedy. I will even go furtherand say that a Jew who insists too much on being treated as ‘‘a human being,’’ thatis, as if he were not different from others, seems to me to be a Jew not sufﬁcientlyconscious of his Jewishness.I don’t like it when the Jews are not up to their vocation. How many timeshave I been surprised by the pettiness that I have encountered regarding theassessment of their own fate in Jews (intelligent ones at that)! Why doesn’t theworld like Jews? Because, of course, they are more capable, they have money, andthey create competition. Why doesn’t the world want to acknowledge that the Jewis a man like any other? It’s a question of propaganda, racial prejudice, lack ofenlightenment. . . .When I hear from the mouths of these people that the Jewish nation is justlike all others, I feel more or less the same way that I would feel if I had heard195499Michelangelo claim that he was in no way different from anyone else, or Chopindemand a ‘‘normal’’ life, or Beethoven assure himself that even he had the right toequality. Too bad! Those who were given the right to superiority don’t have theright to equality.There is simply no more brilliant people, and I say this not just because ithas contained in itself the most important inspirations of the world, or bursts everymoment with some immortal name, or because it has lefts its stamp on history.The Jewish genius is obvious in its very structure, that is, in that which, similarly toindividual brilliance, is most intimately connected with illness, defeat, degrada-tion. Brilliant because it is ill. Higher because it is degraded. Creative because it isabnormal. This people, like Michelangelo, Chopin, or Beethoven, is decadencethat transforms itself into creativity and progress. This people does not have easyaccess to life, it is in disagreement with life and that is why it becomes culture.The hatred, scorn, fear, distrust, that this nation awakens in other nations isof the same category as the feelings that the sick, deaf, dirty, hysterical, and ges-ticulating Beethoven awakened in German villagers during his walks. The Jewishway of the cross is the same as Chopin’s. The history of this people is a secretprovocation of fate, the bringing down upon themselves of all the catastrophes thatcould bring about the fulﬁllment of their mission as a chosen people. What forcesof life brought out this terrifying fact—no one knows. They who are this fact, whoconstitute it, let them not delude themselves even for a moment that they will beable to get themselves out of these chasms onto an even plain.It is curious that the life of even the most common, most healthy Jew isalmost always the life of an outstanding man. Even though he may be healthy,ordinary, undistinguished from others, he is nevertheless different and treateddifferently. He must be isolated and is, even though he does not will it, on theperipheries. One could say, therefore, that even the average Jew is sentenced togreatness, only because he is a Jew. And not just to greatness. He is sentenced to asuicidal and desperate battle with his own form because he does not like himself(like Michelangelo).You will not, therefore, put this menace to rest by imagining that you are‘‘ordinary’’ and feeding yourself the idyllic soup of humanitarianism. O that thebattle with you would become less insidious! As for me, your brilliance has oftenenlightened me and I am greatly in your debt.100Volume 1Thursday
I got up, as usual, around ten o’clock and ate breakfast: tea with ladyﬁngers,then Quaker Oats. Letters: one from Litka in New York, the other from Jele ´ nski in Paris.I left to go to the ofﬁce at twelve (on foot, not far). I had a telephoneconversation ﬁrst with Marrel Alberes about a translation and then with Russo,about a planned trip to Goya. Ríos called to say he had already returned fromMiramar and D˛ abrowski called to ﬁnd out about the apartment.At three, coffee and a ham sandwich.At seven, I left the ofﬁce and went to avenida Costanera to take in a littlefresh air (a heat wave? 32 degrees C). I thought about what Aldo was telling meyesterday. After which I went to Cecilia Benedit’s and we went to supper together. Iate: soup, a steak with potatoes, a salad, and compote. I had not seen her in a longtime and so she told me about her adventures in Mercedes. A singer sat down atour table. There was talk, too, about Adolfo and his astrology. From there, aroundone p.m., I went to Rex’s for coffee. Eisler joined me. Our conversations go more orless like this:Well, what’s new, Mr. Gombrowicz?Pull yourself together at least for a moment, Eisler, I beg of you, sir.Upon returning home, I stopped at Tortoni’s to pick up a package andto have a talk with Poczo. At home I read Kafka’s Diary. I feel asleep aroundthree.I make known the above so that you will see what I am like in my dailyroutine.
IX
Saturday
Extraordinarily WiseProfoundly MoralAbsolutely RealVery HonestAbnormally StupidRepulsively ImmoralRidiculously UnrealVery Dishonest1954101Such is my double-tracked reaction to Mascolo (Dionys Mascolo: Le com- munisme, révolution et communication ou la dialectique des valeurs et des besoins ). A book that is incisive yet menacing in its belligerent monotony. The speciﬁcgoal of this work is to bring to the forefront the Marxist theory of need as the basisof dialectical materialism. Here Mascolo crosses swords with contemporary intel-lectualism, with the entire ﬁeld of non-Communist thought, and his blows areaccurate because the enemy is within him—he, the typical intellectual of Paris,Madrid, or Rome; frequenter of the same cafés; admirer of the same poems;listener to the same music; gourmet of the same tastes; and instigator of the samethoughts. . . .That is why this is a book which is written with an alertness that never lags,even for a moment, and that anticipates all objections. How he protects his posi-tions! Primo: the book does not speak to you with the voice of a Communist, butwith the voice of an independent intellectual who understands Communism. Atthe same time (in the light of the fact that this independence does not sit well withDiamat), it is not the work of a classical intellectual but only of a man who ‘‘isenough of an intellectual not to be a Communist and enough of a Communist notto be an intellectual.’’ Here Mascolo arranges his own position between Commu-nism and a classical intellectualism. Secundo: here the highest level of thinking isobligatory. Here one thinks seriously and for real, therefore, not only does onecriticize Soviet Russia, but one does not even hide that fact that Communism is theheaviest and bloodiest of assignments. One says: This is unavoidable. No one canstop it. This is morally and materially necessary; this is an imperative of history andthe conscience. Tertio: the greatest amount of unﬂagging energy is devoted todemonstrating that Communism is the alpha and omega of today, a revision of allvalues on a scale heretofore unseen. It is a categorical overturning of everything. Itis the single possible revolution and the revolution encompassing all possiblerevolutions. We are in this so completely that all ‘‘beyond’’ becomes impossibleand it is this viewpoint that lends the text the power of something superior, theenormity of a whale which carries the world on its back. Mascolo avoids nothingmore than he avoids the common mistake committed by Communist sympathiz-ers from the intelligentsia, which, while granting Communism the character of anidea, introduces it as just one more idea. No, Communism is not an idea, it is nottruth, it is something that facilitates truth and the idea for man. Communism is the102Volume 1liberation of man from material dependencies, which, up until now, have notallowed him to think and feel the right way, in harmony with his real nature.Quarto: the devastating thesis about the coordination of spirit and matter, thisfascinating and revealing thought appears here the way God appeared to Mosesand dictates the law.This is not a revelation, but the action of these manifestations, of which Iam heartily sick, becomes painful because they have been passed through theprism of a mind and culture more or less like mine. Here someone close to me isspeaking, someone raised on the same masters as I, who, however, having gonedown the same road as I, arrived at a different place, from which he views adifferent panorama. Why? How did this happen? Which of us has lost his direc-tion? One should realize that for people like myself, it is far more difﬁcult to resistCommunism because they are joined to it in their thinking to the degree thatCommunist thought is almost like one of their own thoughts that, somewherealong the line, becomes distorted and suddenly becomes alien and hostile. It is notdifﬁcult to be an opponent of Communism if one believes in the Holy Trinity. It isnot difﬁcult if one breathes a beauty that has passed. It is easy, if one is a faithfulexponent of one’s milieu, if one is a count, cavalryman, landowner, merchant orindustrialist, engineer or doctor, member of the Society of Gentrywomen, if one isa conservative or ﬁnancier, a Sienkiewicz or an anti-Semite. But I! I who demand ahumanity without fetishes; I, a ‘‘traitor’’ and ‘‘provocateur’’ in my ‘‘milieu’’; I, forwhom modern culture is a mystiﬁcation . . . when my hand tears masks from myown face and that of others, when the very desire for an unfalsiﬁed reality lives inme so intensely—because I love the painful birth of the new world that has beentrampling paths for itself for practically the past two hundred years, assailing oneposition after another—I greet it with joy. How can I be in contradiction withCommunism? I really believe that I passed through the introductory phase of thisprocess on my own and perhaps in a way more my own and more authentic thanmany Communists. I subtracted God from myself, I learned to think ruthlessly.What’s more, I learned to discover beauty in the destruction of another, formerbeauty and love in parting from former lovers. Other ties, of a material or socialnature, which could have bound me were dissolved long ago. Today there is nohonor, no authority, no bond that could stop me. I am free, free, et cetera free!Why do I dismiss Communism?1954103Sunday
Eichler went to the country and I moved into his apartment for a few days. Ihave already written in this Diary that I prefer not to like art, that is, I wait for it toimpose itself on me. I do not belong to that category of people who chase afterit. . . . So now Eichler’s paintings began to throw themselves at me from the walls ofthat narrow room with some sort of content that I was incapable of deciphering. Inthis man and in his paintings (which are very similar to him and very insistently hisown: clean, expressing the maximum on the unusually narrow scale of his style)there is some sort of ‘‘biological’’ mystery which I cannot decipher. I suspected himof hysteria and, instead, upon closer contact, discovered a strong and balancednature. One way or the other, these colors, these lines, such stubbornness (ahallmark of art) repeating one and the same thing in every imaginable combina-tion of forms, suggested the thought of ‘‘silken betrayal’’ which I clung to for lack ofanything better. Betrayal? What betrayal? Can I get at it? Each of us escapes fromlife through a different gate and a million doors lead to the immense ﬁelds ofbetrayal. What theoretical powerlessness in the face of existence (I thought, sittingacross from those two-faced forms): Eichler seemed to me to be water runningthrough Mascolo’s ﬁngers, a snake disappearing into the grass, an ant, an insect infoliage dappled by a breeze.
Monday
I could make certain accusations of an intellectual nature against Com-munism.This philosophy is not convincing to me for many reasons—ﬁrst of allbecause, in my understanding, Communism is not so much a philosophical orethical as a technical issue. You say that in order for the spirit to function the rightway, the needs of the body must be satisﬁed? You claim that everyone must beassured a minimum standard of living? Where is the guarantee, though, that yoursystem can assure prosperity? Am I supposed to look for it in the Soviet Union,which, up to now, cannot feed itself without the labor of slaves, or in your reason-ing, where you talk about everything except for the technical efﬁciency of thesystem? If Communism is materialism and if it wants to inﬂuence the spirit104Volume 1through a change in material conditions, why do you preach so much about thespirit and so little about how that victory over matter will happen? The discussionthat ought to take place among the production and management specialists isshifted to the general level, as if it were a matter of ordinary philosophy. Until thetechnical possibility of Communism is elaborated upon, however, all other reﬂec-tions are only a pipe dream.Yet even if your calculations in black and white showed that your systemwould double or even triple the amount of goods per head, liberating man frompoverty, I personally would still be in no position to check these calculations as thistechnical matter requires a technical knowledge about the world that I, not being aspecialist, do not possess. Therefore, I could only believe you, and, equally well,could believe other specialists, whose calculations indicate just the opposite.Should I base my access to revolution, which ruins all organizations created up tonow to check nature, on such frail foundations? And by glibly swallowing all theviolence, which accompanies these beginnings?
Thursday
I could produce many other arguments against Communism on intellec-tual grounds.But wouldn’t it be more appropriate from the point of view of my ownpolitics if I didn’t even write or think about this?The artist who allows himself to be led astray into the terrain of thesecerebral speculations is lost. Lately, we artists have allowed ourselves to be ledaround too sheepishly by philosophers and other scientists. We have proved inca-pable of being sufﬁciently different. An excessive respect for scientiﬁc truth hasobscured our own truth. In our eagerness to understand reality, we forget that weare not here to understand reality, but only to express it. We, art, are reality. Art is afact and not commentary attached to fact. It is not our job to explain, elucidate,systematize, prove. We are the word that claims: this hurts me, this intrigues me, Ilike this, I hate this, I desire this, I don’t want this. . . . Science will always remainan abstraction, but our voice is the voice of a man made of ﬂesh and blood, this isthe individual voice. Not an idea, but a personality is important to us. We do notbecome real in the realm of concepts, but in the realm of people. We are and we1954105must remain persons, our role depends on the fact that the living, human word notstop sounding in a world that is becoming more and more abstract.I think, therefore, that literature has submitted itself far too much to pro-fessors in this century and that we, artists, will have to cause a scandal in order todestroy these relations. We will be forced to act arrogantly and brashly towardscience to make our desire for an unhealthy ﬂirting with formulas of scientiﬁcintelligence go away. We must oppose our own, individual intelligence, our per-sonal life, and our feelings as emphatically as possible to the truths of the laboratory.Maybe it would be better, therefore, if I did not try to understand Marxismand would allow the phenomenon to permeate me only as much as it is in the airthat I breathe.Yet such an intellectual escape would mean that I am not capable ofresisting it as a concrete person. I must, therefore, enter into that alien kingdom asa conqueror who proclaims his own right. Here I must say: I am not too interestedin arguments and counterarguments, that two-step in which wise men lose them-selves as easily as any old layperson. Having the straightforward emotions of a man,I look at your faces when you speak and I see how theory makes your face grimace.I am not called to conﬁrm the justice of your reasoning. I am concerned that yourbeing right does not change your faces into mugs, and that being right does notmake you repulsive, hateful, and impossible to swallow. My job is not to controlideas, but merely to conﬁrm how an idea affects a person. An artist is he who says:This man speaks wisely, but he himself is a fool. Or: The purest morality issuesfrom the lips of that man, but, beware, for he himself cannot keep up with hismorality and turns into a swine.This is valuable, I believe, insofar as an idea abstracted from man does notfully exist. There are no ideas like embodied ones. There is no word that is not alsoﬂesh.
Monday
The predicament of people like Mascolo . . . The spiritual process of which he is a product: what splendor! There isnothing more shocking than the sight of mankind during the past two hundredyears, pulling up all anchors in order to pass from static into absolute dynamics,106Volume 1from man and the world of given reality to man and the world in endless becom-ing, like a ship sailing from port into open sea. After having demolished heaven,after having demolished all stability, we revealed ourselves to ourselves as a volatileelement, and our loneliness and singularity in the cosmos, that incredible unleash-ing of our humanity in a space ﬁlled with nothing except ourselves, can appall andhorrify—the boldness of this thrust has no parallel. People who participate in thisprocess, like Mascolo, like me, like practically all of European intelligentsia, couldjustiﬁably experience the worst fears and scruples if the thing did not have thecharacter of something inevitable.If Communism has become a fascinating phenomenon for many, it isbecause it constitutes the strongest, up until now, materialization of the intellect.It is as if the incantations of the most enlightened spirits ﬁnally drew a socialforce out of nonbeing: a force made of people and capable of concrete action.This wolf had to be called out of the woods and now the problem is not to let itdevour us.Mascolo personiﬁes the predicament of the intelligentsia that spawnedCommunism in order to let itself be devoured. In this thinking one discovers theplay of two mutually exclusive extremely intense elements: strength and weakness.This is probably the key to the riddle why this thought seems at once moral andimmoral, wise and irrelevant, sober and drunk.This thought, having demolished, as we have said, the old metaphysicalorder, suddenly glimpsed itself alone with the world. This was a world immeasura-bly easy to control by thought, it seemed, because all restraints on thought hadvanished and it had become the sole arbiter of reality. This is the reason thatMascolo felt himself to be the lord of the world (hence the pride and feeling ofpower wafting from his book). Yet when Mascolo took in the whole world fromthese heights, it seemed to him to be something so overwhelmingly immense in itsvariety and so incapable of being exhausted in its movement that, in the end,Mascolo, the ruler, felt lost in it and his thought grew terriﬁed and began to gasp(hence the panic in this book). The moment Mascolo tore his gaze from the worldin order to confront his own thought, he found himself in the pincers of the samecontradiction. On the one hand, thought is the sole and highest judge, the leaderof mankind, the organizer of matter. On the other, it is an unclean thing, depen-dent on being, subordinate to matter, a thing that can hardly be called ‘‘thought’’ in1954107the old sense of the word. At the sight of this, he underwent both the highestintoxication with power and the most catastrophic feeling of annihilating power-lessness. What does one do then? Believe in the power of thought and tear into theworld with it? Or, not trusting intelligence too much, allow the world to createitself? In this second instance the mind no longer asks what the world is supposedto be like and, instead, after narrowing its ﬁeld of vision, asks, how am I to act in theworld? The mind then becomes that which it has been for centuries: an instru-ment of individual cognition within the scale of a single life. In this reduced scale itfeels surer of itself.Yet Mascolo chose the ﬁrst of these paths, why? First of all, because there isnothing left for thought (which is dependent on matter) to do, superﬁcially anyway,except to transform matter. For the Hegelian who is a Marxist, there is simply noother way except the one that leads to reforming the world. This alone, however,would not have inclined Mascolo’s thought to plunge so desperately into the world.That individual thought, even if there is a small sense of proportion left in it, wouldnot dare commit a deed so bold. Here, in order to understand Mascolo’s situation,we must take into account the fact that his thought is not in the least his ownthought, but a collective one, the result of a thousand-year-long process, into whichwent countless individual achievements. If I use my mind to decide whether or not Iam to board a train, I do not need to refer to that collective knowledge. I myself knowwhat I am supposed to do. When, however, I am supposed to solve what mankind issupposed to be like, I cannot do this in any other way than by using the thoughtaccumulated in libraries. The problem concerning mankind can be solved onlythrough the thought of mankind, not that of the individual. The thought of man-kind, greater than our own, intoxicates and stuns us: it thrusts us into the area ofsupra-individual solutions.The following happened to Mascolo: to rule the world he ﬂed to a thoughtstronger than his own; but it is exactly this thought that he is unable to govern andit now throws him back at the world.
Monday
Mountains. Córdoba. I arrived here in Vertientes this morning and settledinto the Lipkowskis’ beautiful chalet. Your gaze tears itself away from the horses,108Volume 1chickens, dogs, cows, only to sink into an expanse full of a complicated geographyof mountain chains and ridges. Panorama.I still have the trip to Mendoza.
Tuesday
Mascolo’s experience, described above, manifests itself in his language,which is completely removed from tangible reality and saturated with abstractionand thereby is similar to all languages of the intellect. Here you will ﬁnd the samehigher school of equestrianism, whose object is to maintain the appearance offreedom while struggling spasmodically to stay in the saddle. Yet this gets so deepby the minute that Mascolo drowns in it; it gets so subtle that Mascolo gets tangledup in his own web; so general that it can have a hundred other meanings; and soprecise that it is the work of a watchsmith hanging over an abyss. When I readMascolo, I am less interested in the thought itself, which I know from somewhereelse, than in the desperate struggle between the thinker and the thought. What aneffort! Multiply these efforts of the author by those of his readers! Imagine howthese mountains of syllogisms will invade other weaker minds that read the oddthing here and there to understand the odd thing here and there and imagine howMascolo’s thought will blossom in each of these heads in a separate misunder-standing. So where are we? In the land of power, light, and precision? Or in thedirty kingdom of inadequacy?
PowerLightMethodTriumphWeaknessDarknessChaosDefeat
What close neighbors these two sets of litanies are, two sisters! Yet what iseven more amazing and disturbing is that because of this excess of virtue, thoughttumbles into sin. It is stupid because of an excess of wisdom. It is weak because ofan excess of power. It is dark because it is too thirsty for light.Let us take another look at Mascolo’s predicament.He got stuck but he could have saved himself if he had maintained hisfreedom, a freedom that allows us to retreat when we get stuck. This possibility of1954109retreat, this ‘‘slowing down,’’ this extraction of oneself from excess into a morehuman dimension, a freer one, this, for me, is the only real freedom. I received aletter containing praise, which appealed to me so much that I realized at once howaccurately it had struck at the heart of my aspirations. ‘‘The freedom that yourender in your diary is more real than Sartre’s constrained professorial freedom.’’This comparison suddenly revealed the difference between the freedom to which Iaspire here and the intellectual freedom that is so ‘‘constrained’’ that it essentiallybecomes a new prison. My freedom, the ordinary, everyday, normal freedom,needed by us to live, a matter of instinct rather than cerebral meditation, is afreedom that does not want to be anything absolute—a freedom that is devil-may-care and free even in relation to its own freedom. The Sartres and Mascolos seemto forget that man is a being created to live in an atmosphere of average pres-sures and median temperatures. Today we know the mortal cold and the living ﬁre,but we have forgotten the secrets of a light breeze, which refreshes and allowsone to breathe.Freedom! In order to be free one needs not only to want to be free. Onemust not want to be free too much. No desire, no thought taken too far will becapable of opposing extremisms. Mascolo killed the freedom in himself at the verymoment he subordinated his ordinary, direct feeling of freedom to intellectualreasoning. If we were to ask this slave if he is free, he would answer yes, of course,because only he is free who understands his dependence on the dialectical processof history, etc., etc. How, therefore, can his reasoned freedom defend him from theintellect? How can this concept of freedom assure him freedom from other con-cepts? The hope that anything could bring about some sort of relaxation in him isabsolutely out of the question.That is why Mascolo cannot back out. He must keep going forward. It is asif he were riding a bicycle: if he stops, he’ll fall over. Mascolo is motorized, this isno longer a bike, but a motorbike—loaded with collective thought, collectivesuffering, and propelled by the dynamic of the proletariat. Propelled by the entiremechanism of culture and civilization, which relies on a ceaseless piling up, aunending accumulation. Do you believe the suspicion that he is speeding toward atask beyond his power would stop him? You are direly mistaken: this is a man whohas lost his center. If the task is beyond his strength, then it simply means that hemust make himself over in order to be up to the loftiness of the task. That is why he110Volume 1is a mere tool to himself, that is why Mascolo is only one more obstacle forMascolo to overcome. That is why his book is written even more for himself thanfor others: here Mascolo remakes Mascolo, cutting off his retreat. This is how hespeeds into the cosmos, spurring himself to greater speed. The more enormous thecosmos becomes, the less graspable in all of the terrifying ﬂuidity of its fathomless-ness, the more convulsively these ﬁngers grip. For this human being, just as allother human beings, desires a ﬁnite world. That entire dialectic of development, ofbecoming, of making dependent is a subtle lie that is supposed to conceal the realdesire for ﬁnitude. He demolishes form in order to impose a new one. One cannotexist without form and whatever the form, the minute you choose it, you must takeit to its ultimate conclusion. Why did he say A? Who knows. But if he said A, hemust say B.
Wednesday
Wind and spindles of clouds crowding the peaks from the south. A lonechicken pecks away on the lawn. . . .To be a concrete man. To be an individual. Not to strive to transform thewhole world. To live in the world, changing it only as much as possible from withinthe reach of my nature. To become real in harmony with my needs, my individualneeds.I do not want to say that collective and abstract thought, that Humanity assuch, are not important. Yet a certain balance must be restored. The most moderndirection of thought is one that will rediscover the individual man.
X
Friday
Jele ´nski’s letter in Wiadomo´ sci in which he answers Collector’s note aboutthe publication of my work in Preuves. Even though I am in complete agreementwith Jele ´ nski that there does exist a certain afﬁnity between myself and Pirandello(the problem of deformation) and also between myself and Sartre (in Ferdydurke,one could ﬁnd several intimations of what later became existentialism), I wouldprefer, as Collector says, that they not have anything in common with my views.1954111For all practical purposes, I would prefer not being like anyone else, even thoughthought is just one of the elements of art, even though it has happened that a mostcommon thought such as ‘‘love sanctiﬁes’’ or ‘‘life is beautiful’’ was turned into awork of dazzling inspiration and astounding originality and force. What is an ideaof even a vision of the world in art? Alone they are nothing. They can havemeaning only in relation to the way in which they were felt and spiritually ex-hausted, in relation to the level of elevation and the light that they radiate fromthose heights. A work of art is not a matter of just one thought, one discovery, buta creative product that arises from a thousand minute inspirations, the product ofa man who sets up residence in his own mine and keeps extracting new min-erals from it.Yet there are other reasons that I would like to separate myself from theSartres and the Pirandellos: reasons of a social, worldly nature. Too often it hap-pens that in the speciﬁc conditions of our Polish coexistence, someone tries todenigrate me with the help of such ‘‘famous names,’’ and, pufﬁng himself up withSartre, says with condescension: Gombrowicz. This is something I cannot toleratein this diary, which is a private diary, where the subject is always and exclusivelypersonal matters, where I desire to defend my person and create a place for itamong people.Ah, Jele ´ nski, my friend!Oh, to ﬁnally get oneself out of this suburb, foyer, hutch and become nota—Polish, that is, inferior, right?—author, but a phenomenon having its ownmeaning and justiﬁcation! To break out of the deadly mediocrity of my milieu andﬁnally come into existence. My situation is serious and, I would say, desperate. Ihave been delicately suggesting to these minds, furnished with ‘‘famous names,’’that one can mean something even without world renown is one is really andruthlessly oneself, but they want me to become famous ﬁrst. Then they will in-clude me in their inventory and will puzzle over me. In the opinion of all thesedisheveled Polish connoisseurs I am done for by the very fact that there exists acertain overlap between my own thinking and that of the Sartres or Pirandellos. Itis assumed, therefore, that I want to say the same thing as they, that I want to breakdown open doors and that if I say something else, it is because I am less competent,less serious, and less coherent. They assume—with the conceit of snobs (because asnob is conceited not with a feeling of his own worth, but because he knows112Volume 1someone who possesses worth)—that my sense of form together with its practicaleffects is ‘‘nothing new’’ and they believe that my criticism of art is an unpremedi-tated frown, malice, caprice. They will not take the trouble to check what theinner logic of my reactions is and their lackey’s soul will be enchanted if it is able toconceive of my soul as nothing but a humble if clumsy handmaiden and imitatorof those lofty spirits.I can defend myself against this only by deﬁning myself, only by delineat-ing myself endlessly. I will have to describe myself until, ﬁnally, the dullest expertnotices my presence. My method consists of this: to show the battle I wage withpeople for my own personality and to exploit all the personal sore spots that arisebetween them and me, for a more and more distinct delineation of my own I.Deﬁne myself against the Sartrisms and against all of modern thought,which is sharp and burning with a white heat?There is nothing easier! I am blunted thought, a being of median tempera-tures, a spirit in a certain state of relaxation: I am he who relieves tension. I am likeaspirin, which, if one is to believe the advertisement, rids one of excessive cramps.What sort of feelings will you have when reading my diary? Isn’t it something likehaving a country boy from Sandomierz county enter a thundering factory and walkaround as if he were in his own backyard? Look at the white-hot oven whereexistentialisms are cooked up; here Sartre turns molten lead into his freedom-responsibility. Over there is a poetry workshop, where a thousand workers, drip-ping with sweat amid the dizzying speed of assembly lines and gears, work asharper and sharper electromagnetic knife in harder and harder material; and overthere are bottomless cauldrons bubbling with ideologies, worldviews, and beliefs.Here is the cavern of Catholism. Further down the foundry of Marxism; then thehammers of psychoanalysis; Hegel’s artesian wells and the looms of phenomenol-ogy; and further yet are the galvanized and hydraulic pyres of surrealism or prag-matism. The factory, groaning and speeding in the clatter and whir of production,produces more and more perfect instruments, which, in turn, serve to improve andspeed up production so that all of this becomes mightier, more violent, moreprecise. Yet I walk among these machines and products with a thoughtful air andwithout much interest, exactly as if I were walking in an orchard, there, in thecountryside, and every once in a while, trying this or that product (like a pear orplum) I say: —Hm, hm, this is too hard for me. Or: —This is somewhat overwhelm-1954113ing to my taste. Or: —The devil take this, this is too uncomfortable, too stiff. Or,too: —Ha! This would not be too bad if it were not so red-hot.So that the workers cover me with furtive, suspicious glances. Well, well,look, a consumer has appeared among the producers!
Saturday
Yes! to be sharp, wise, mature, to be an ‘‘artist,’’ ‘‘thinker,’’ ‘‘stylist’’ only to acertain degree but never too much. And to make from this ‘‘never too much’’ apower equal to all the very, very intense forces. To maintain one’s own human scalein the face of all gargantuan phenomena. Not to be anything more in culture thana simple country bumpkin, just a Pole, and not even be a country bumpkin or Poletoo much. To be free, but even in freedom not to be excessive.Herein lies the difﬁculty.For if I had entered culture as a pure barbarian, an absolute anarchist, acomplete primitive, the ideal country boy, or a classic Pole, you would break intoapplause immediately. You would acknowledge that I am not at all a bad producerof the primitive in a pure state.But then I would be a manufacturer like all the rest: like they for whom theproduct becomes more important than they themselves are. Everything that isclean from the point of view of style is an elaboration.The real battle in culture (about which one hears so little) does not takeplace, according to me, between enemy truths or between different life-styles. If aCommunist opposes his worldview to that of a Catholic, then these are still twoworldviews. But that other antinomy:
culture—wildnessknowledge—ignorancelight—darkness
is not the most important either. As a matter of fact, one could say that these arephenomena that harmonize, that complement one another. The most important,most extreme, and most incurable dispute is that waged in us by two of our mostbasic strivings: the one that desires form, shape, deﬁnition and the other, whichprotests against shape, and does not want form. Humanity is constructed in such a114Volume 1way that it must deﬁne itself and then escape its own deﬁnitions. Reality is notsomething that allows itself to be completely contained in form. Form is not inharmony with the essence of life, but all thought which tries to describe thisimperfection also becomes form and thereby conﬁrms only our striving for it.That entire philosophical and ethical dialectic of ours takes place againstthe background of an immensity, which is called shapelessness, which is neitherdarkness nor light, but exactly a mixture of everything: ferment, disorder, impurity,and accident. Sartre’s opponent is not a priest. It is the milkman, pharmacist, childof the pharmacist, and the carpenter’s wife. They are the citizens of an intermedi-ary sphere, the sphere of incomplete form and value which are always somethingunexpected, a surprise. Sartre will ﬁnd an opponent from this sphere in himself,someone whom one could call a ‘‘not-quite-Sartre.’’ Their argument is that nothought, no form at all is capable of encompassing being, and the more all-encompassing they are, the more mendacious.Am I overrating myself? Actually, I would rather let someone else have thisrole of commentator on one’s own dubious attainments, but the point is that, inthe circumstances in which I ﬁnd myself, no one can do this for me. Not evenJele ´nski, that priceless advocate of mine. I believe that I have accomplished muchin my own domain to make this conﬂict with form palpable.In my works I have shown man stretched on the procrustean bed of form, Ihave found my own language for showing his hunger and distrust of form. I havetried to bring the distance that exists between him and his form into the light ofday, through my own perspective. I have tried to demonstrate in a way that was notboring but amusing, that is, human and alive, how form arises between us, how itcreates us. I have brought out into the open this sphere of the ‘‘interhuman’’ whichis crucial to people and I have lent it the characteristics of a creative force. I havecome closer in art to a certain vision of man—man whose real element is notnature, but people, man not only situated among people but full of them andinspired by them.I tried to show that the ultimate point of reference for man is man, notsome absolute value and I tried to get to this most difﬁcult kingdom of immaturityin love with itself, where our unofﬁcial and even illegal mythology is created. Itried to point up the power of regressive forces hidden in humanity and the poetryof violence inﬂicted on superiority by the inferior.1954115At the same time, I bound this area of experience to my base—to Poland—and allowed myself to whisper to the Polish intelligentsia that its real assignment isnot rivalry with the West in creating form, but the uncovering of the very relation-ship of man to form and, what goes with it, to culture. That in this, we will bestronger, more independent and effective.I have probably succeeded in illustrating by my own example that makingoneself conscious of that ‘‘lack of’’—lack of form, underdevelopment, immaturity—not only does not weaken but strengthens. That it could even become theembryo of vitality and development—just as in art the other (I would say, slighting)approach to form can assure renewal and the expansion of the means of artisticexpression. In proclaiming the principle that man is higher than his productswherever and whenever possible, I provide (him) with the freedom that our shriv-eled soul desperately needs.Are you, experts, so nearsighted that one has to shove everything underyour noses? Are you incapable of understanding anything? When I am amongscholars like this, I could swear that I am among chickens. Quit pecking at me!Quit plucking my feathers! Quit squawking and clucking! Quit preening yourturkey pride by blustering that this thought is well known, that that one has alreadybeen expressed—I signed no contract to serve up ﬁrst-time ideas. In me, certainideas that are in the air we all breathe are joined in a special and uniquely Gom-browiczian sense and I am this sense.
Tuesday
La Falda.A health resort in the mountains of Córdoba. Ladies and gentlemen sit anddrink refrescos in a sidewalk café on the avenida Eden while tethered donkeysnibble on tree bark and a loudspeaker broadcasts the overture to the third act ofTraviata.Nothing out of the ordinary. Yet for me this place is like faces in a dream, acombination of haunting faces, two different faces, one overlapping, one maskingthe other. An ominous duality hiding a heavy and complex secret. All because Iwas here ten years ago.Now I see.116Volume 1Then, lost in Argentina, without work, without support, suspended in avoid, not knowing what I would be doing in a month, I asked myself with acuriosity that sometimes reached an almost completely pathological pitch (whichis what the future usually arouses in me anyway) where I would be in ten years.The curtain has risen. I see myself sitting in a café on the same avenida, like that, that’s me. That is me in ten years. I put my hand on the table. I look at thebuilding opposite. I call the waiter and order un cortado. I drum my ﬁngers on thetable. All this has the character of secret information, communicated to that otherone ten years ago, and he acts as if I were being seen by him. All the same, I seehim, when he sat here, maybe at the same table. Hence the awfulness of doublevision, which I feel as the bursting of reality, something unbearable, as if I werelooking myself in the eyes.The loudspeaker broadcasts the overture to the third act of Traviata.
Wednesday
Mi™osz: La prise du pouvoir.A very strong book. Mi™osz is an experience for me. He is the only émigréwriter who was really drenched by that tempest. Others, no. They were out in therain but they all carried umbrellas. Mi™osz was soaked to the skin and at the end thehurricane even tore the clothes off his back. He returned naked. Be happy thatdecency has been preserved! At least one of you is naked! You, the remainder, areindecent: dressed in your pantaloons, various style jackets, your ties and hand-kerchiefs. What shame!There is no lack of talent among us. Józef Mackiewicz’s My Friend, Flor ischarming and Straszewicz has burst out with a cascade of humor, but neither ofthem is sufﬁciently initiated. Mi™osz knows. Mi™osz looked and experienced: in theﬂashing tempest something appeared to him . . . the Medusa of our times. Mi™oszfell, ravaged by her gaze.Ravaged? Perhaps too much so. Initiated? Perhaps excessively or perhaps theinitiation was too passive? To listen to one’s time? Yes. But not to submit to it. It isdifﬁcult to talk about this on the basis of his works in prose up to now, The CaptiveMind, Seizure of Power, and his one volume of poetry, Daylight, because theirtheme is special: a recapitulation of a certain period and also a testimony and warn-1954117ing. Yet I sense that Mi™osz has allowed History to impose not only a theme but also acertain attitude that I would call the attitude of a man who has been overthrown.But isn’t Mi™osz ﬁghting? Yes, he is ﬁghting, but only with means hisopponent allows; it looks as if he had actually believed in Communism, that he is adevastated intellectual and that he has risen to participate in the last heroic battleas a devastated intellectual. This beggar, enamored of his own Job-like nakedness,this bankrupt engrossed in his bankruptcy, has probably voluntarily limited hischances for effective resistance. Mi™osz’s mistake—this is how I see it and it is amistake that is quite prevalent—consists of his reducing himself to the level of thepoverty that he describes. Afraid of rhetoric and denying his right to luxury, he,Mi™osz, is loyal and true to his brothers in misfortune and wants to be poor likethem. Yet such an intention in an artist is incompatible with the essence of hisactions, for art is a luxury, freedom, play, dream, and power. Art arises not frompoverty, but from riches. It is born not when one is under the wagon but when oneis on it. Art has something triumphant in it even when it is wringing its hands.Hegel? Hegel doesn’t have much in common with us because we are dance. Theman who does not allow himself to be impoverished will respond to the creativityof Marxism with a different creativity, with the astounding, new, and unforeseenriches of life. Has Mi™osz made a sufﬁcient effort to extricate himself from thedialectics that have shackled him?If not, I know that it is not due to lack of strength, but to an excess of loyalty.Talent should not be too loyal. Loyalty is a limitation and talent must strive to beunlimited. If Columbus had been too loyal to the egg, he would not have dis-covered America. There exist a great many undiscovered Americas. We are not atthe limits of our land.These are the kinds of dialogues I have with Mi™osz when I read him, but Iknow that they are too impatient. These books are the harbingers of a new realityand their goal is to acquaint us with history. The transformation—this is a key wordin art—will come later.
Friday
Walking in the dry bed of a stream which leads to the foot of the Banderita,I was reminded (because La Falda is a hand which runs across my keyboard118Volume 1evoking forgotten melodies) of the twins who used to go there with me. Nothing ismore eloquent! What a revelation! What a delightful and inspired joke of theCreator! These two sixteen-year-old boys were so alike that I could not tell themapart, in their huge cowboy hats shading amused eyes: they always appeared out ofnowhere, one at a slight distance from the other so that their sameness enhancedthe effect to such a degree that even though they were puppies and striplings, theynevertheless seemed to have a power that ﬁlled all the expanse and in their playbounced off the mountains. In the twins everything became brilliant and amazing,witty and wonderful, important and revealing, only because there was alwaysanother one hiding nearby somewhere.Considering then the weight and holiness of the revelation, which I wasprivileged to observe of yore, I return to avenida Eden where someone suddenlygrabs my arm: Witoldo! I look and it’s the twin! A twin now sporting a mustache!And gaunt somehow. Ha, a twin, but no longer a twin. A twin rid of his former twin.Next to him: a woman with two small children.The twin said: This is my wife.At that moment, I saw, somewhat further away, another twin also sporting amustache and with him a woman and child.
Thursday
Mrs. Irena G. from Toronto has ﬁred off a letter ‘‘To the Editor of Wia-domo´ sci.’’ This one is so beautiful that it distinguishes itself in the uncommoncollection that constitutes reader letters in Wiadomo´ sci.‘‘Since 1946,’’ we read, ‘‘my hobby has been the diligent study of my friends’attitudes to the seers of tomorrow.’’Having examined her friends’ attitudes to the seers of tomorrow, Mrs. G.came to the conclusion that:‘‘In spite of everything, it is vox populi that determines the greatness of awriter. A hundred critics may shout that a play is brilliant, but if the auditorium isempty, the play must come down.’’Mrs. G. does not stop with the discovery of this truth, she also explains whyit has not been universally accepted.‘‘And if the cross-eyed and a handful of snobs, who have submitted to the1954119demagoguery of the cross-eyed, cry out like possessed cats, then it is preciselybecause vox populi, that mob of intellectuals, that highest judge, does not want tolet them into the palace of art.’’But the cross-eyed are insufﬁcient to incense Mrs. G., who speaks in thename of the highest tribune of the intellectual throng and, for good measure, theguardian of the palace of art.‘‘Cripples cannot irritate. Cripples arouse pity.’’But the most appealing is the Greek ending:‘‘Dogs may bark but the caravan moves on. The unsurpassed, Helleniccaravan, escorted by vox populi.’’
Wednesday
Kafka’s Diary. It led me to take another look at The Trial and to compare itwith Gide’s stage version. Even this time though, I could not read the book all theway through. I am dazzled by the sun of its brilliant metaphor, which breaksthrough the clouds of the Talmud, but to read page after page is entirely beyond me.Some day we will know why in our century so many great artists wrote somany unreadable books. And how in the world did these unreadable and unreadbooks inﬂuence the century, nevertheless, and become well known? I have had tointerrupt my reading of many of these books with genuine wonder and unfeignedacknowledgment simply because they bored me to tears. Someday it may be ob-vious what sort of warped marriage of artist and recipient spawned these works so de-prived of artistic sex appeal. What a disgrace! At times I have the impression thatsome sort of stupidity lives among us writers and that it warps all our work. We don’tknow how to defend ourselves against it because it is almost always anonymous.Sometimes this absurdity appears with the shamelessness of a spread-eagledmaiden; a few days ago, something like this happened to me. I am sitting in a bar. Acertain Argentinean comes over to me to show me the collected works of the poetPablo de Rokha—a volume the size of a small suitcase. I open it. In the center arefour photographs of the author and three of his wife (also a poet). Further on, areproduction of the manuscript, the introduction of the author, in which he saysthat he ‘‘offers these poems to the Chilean people’’ (something like that), and thenmore appendices. Leaﬁng through the pages I read:120Volume 1‘‘Criminal faces shout their pale triangles.’’‘‘The sun resounding mightily in the solar system, a junk wagon full oflightning.’’‘‘In a daily hurricane, the tempest of war communicates its grumblings tothe twilight . . .’’Perhaps I am not citing his words exactly, but even so you can see that thisis not at all bad, a pretty decent class of poetry. Still . . . The Argentinean said: He is a great poet.I didn’t say anything. Zero. With that enormous tome on my knees—withthat gigantic object—the material enormity of the thing crushed me like a big boot.I knew that if I were to say anything at all of what I wanted to say, he would answerthat I do not understand poetry, that I have not fathomed the Chilean soul, that Ido not understand the metaphors or that I am not registering the subterraneanvibrations of the word. Therefore, I said that I would read it, after which I lugged ithome and deposited it in a corner. After a few days, I had to take and lug it back tothe Argentinean, which I did, and when that enormous object found itself beyondmy reach at last, I had to stammer a few words which joined all the other wordsstammered on similar occasions by all the other porters of the world in order toassure master de Rokha eternal praise in the heavens, amen.Yes, yes . . . but de Rokha’s volume is only the caricatured magniﬁcation ofthe microbe which is the secret disgrace of literature: that it no longer attracts orseduces. O unhappy ones! No one loves you anymore! You don’t appeal to anyoneanymore! You don’t excite anyone anymore! You are appreciated, that is all. . . .You testify to the dignities of the human spirit and the greatness of Art, butpeople do not like you.The situation is made worse by the fact that contemporary criticism lackssufﬁcient intelligence and also sufﬁcient strength to overcome the most difﬁculttasks: to return to matters that are elementary but eternally relevant, which seem tobe dying among us because they are too easy, too simple. Criticism is capable onlyof perfecting, and perfecting to absurdity, the mechanism which rules us today andby dint of which better and better books are being produced as literature. Thesegentlemen will never dare touch the system itself, this exceeds their capabilities.For this, as any other characteristic of literature, is the result of interdependencieswhich arise between the artist and other people. If you want a singer to sing1954121differently, you must bind him to other people, make him love along with someoneelse and make him love differently. The combinations of styles are inexhaustible,but they are all basically a combination of persons, the enchantment of one personwith another. Literature remains, unfortunately, the romance of older, subtle menin love with one another, who shower one another with favors! Break out of thatmagic circle! Seek new inspirations! Allow a child, a puppy, a half-wit to seduceyou, bind yourselves to people of other conditions.Up until now, only Marxism has been capable of such reform in the verycondition of the writer by subjecting him to the proletariat. In fact, Marxism hasmerely submitted the writer to theory and bureaucracy, from which derives themost boring literature in all of history. No, no, you won’t be able to do this withyour wizened and pepper-dry theories: you need to have a wave of enchantmentwelling up from those lower levels to draw you out of yourselves. When yousucceed in really falling in love with inferiority, you will appeal to it, even if yourlove turns out to be too difﬁcult for your inferior brothers. By loving and lovingopenly, you will stop being all alone.
XI
Thursday
Zbyszewski’s article in Kultura: that Polish literature has no chance in theworld market because Polish life is not powerful enough to arouse interest. Whatnauseating cant from the perspective of art! I hold it against Zbyszewski that hisconcept of mountains is ﬂat. He clambers all over the peaks with a journalisticunceremoniousness, with a practical ‘‘seriousness’’ that has become our latestwisdom? In this article one speaks of literature as ‘‘production’’ that requires ‘‘ad-vertisement’’ and ‘‘propaganda,’’ relies on ‘‘readers,’’ and looks for publishers. Tohell with the production language of the ﬁve-year plans! Earlier, Zbyszewski ap-peared with a revelation no less zealously trivializing: that literature is without achance because of a crisis in the area of domestic help: for lack of servants, theladies have no time to read. This is possible, I suppose, but isn’t this a kind ofkitchen realism? And isn’t this avenue of approach to literary matters an answer initself to the question of why Polish literature does not have a chance. No, not only122Volume 1because we are exotic to the rest of the world. One can change a theme or improveit but it is more difﬁcult to change the fact that our notion of literature is eitherhighfalutinly romantic or ﬂatly sober, on the level of domestic help— tertium non datur. Either holiness, a mission, and revelation or readers, awards, and publishers.We are great when we are drunk but ours is a kitchen sobriety and there is nochance of our reconciling greatness with sobriety. I heard that a certain professor’swife was transﬁxed by this article. And why not! He explains to us pleasantly whywe are brilliant but unrecognized and this explanation is exactly in proportion toour lack of brilliance, our ordinariness.Yesterday three men at Teodolina’s: one clean shaven, the second mus-tached, the third bearded, and they were amazed that they could not come to anagreement about the political situation in the Far East. I said: I am amazed that youtalk to one another at all. Each of you is a different solution to the human face andpersoniﬁes a different understanding of man. If a bearded man is okay, then aclean-shaven or mustached one is a monster, a clown, a degenerate, and a generalabsurdity; and if a clean-shaven man is the right type, then a bearded one is amonstrosity, sloppiness, nonsense, and foulness. Well then! What are you waitingfor? Start punching!Gide’s correspondence with Claudel: What a little piece of theater! Howthat deformed itself in a few years! The dialogue between the believer and non-believer does not make one laugh, but that little coat and tails . . . that coat ofexcellent French mondanité, the fact that everything is so smoothed out literarily.Maya nude and Maya clothed, God between Monsieur Gide and Monsieur Clau-del. The naïveté of this sophistication. Quelle délicatesse des sentiments! The realauthor of this correspondence is the domestic help, this really is something forZbyszewski. For all this delicacy is elaborated by an inferior people, this highdialogue is rooted in the populace but it has forgotten about its roots and strutsabout as if it existed on its own. Again, therefore, one must refer to this inferiortruth, which is at the base of the superior truth.Zosia appropriated my rug and decorated her bedroom with it, but when thesubject of doling out three hundred pesos came up, Zosia claimed the matter wasn’turgent. And her friends, Go´ ska and Hala, ﬂatter her by following in her tracks.I stopped by the café where a group of young poets, Concreto-Invencion(or maybe it was the group Madi), gather every week. There are always ten poets1954123yelling at each other in a passionate exchange at one of the tables. Yet this café hasterrible acoustics and at this hour is full of people. You can’t hear a thing. So I said:wouldn’t it be appropriate to move to another café? . . . but these words drowned inthe general racket. So I shouted them again, once, twice, and I kept on shoutinginto the ear of my neighbor until I realized that they were probably all shouting thesame thing—but they could not hear each other. Strange people those poets. Togather together every week in one place in order not to be able to make themselvesunderstood in the matter of moving to another café . . .
Tuesday
With Ernesto Sabato (an Argentine writer) in the bar Helvetico.Besides writing, Sabato teaches philosophy privately and initiates me intohis method. He says: Hay que golpear (one must strike). One must tear them awayfrom the reality to which they have become accustomed and cause them to seeeverything anew. Their uneasiness will force them to seek solutions and then turnto a teacher . . . but one has to do everything, one has to create a situation thatthreatens them. . . .This is correct. For knowledge whatever it is worth, from the most precisemathematics to the darkest suggestions of art, is not to calm the soul but to create astate of vibration and tension in it.
Saturday
Tuwim’s death. I can imagine the obituaries. Here, privately, however, Ican jot down: the greatest contemporary Polish poet has died. The greatest? Un-doubtedly. Great? Hm . . .He did not introduce us to anything, he discovered nothing, initiated usinto nothing, did not provide us with a single key. Yet he vibrated, spouted, dazzled. . . with the magic of ‘‘the poetic word.’’ Such a sensual vibration of the poeticharp, breathing verbal luxury, is, in art, the highest aspiration of a primitive people.He was a poet, therefore, who brought us no honor, even unmasked us a little. Ourshame lies in the fact that we can say that each of Tuwim’s poems is ‘‘wonderful,’’but in answer to the question, what of Tuwim did he introduce into the poetry of124Volume 1the world, we would not be able to give an answer. For Tuwim as Tuwim, that is, asa personality, did not exist. A harp without a harpist.I am curious if those writing the obituaries will risk revealing this truth. Ithink rather that they will be kept in that healthily conventional poeticized style,with a tear because of ‘‘betrayal.’’ Our sense of poetry is, as I have said, ratherprimitive and strongly mechanized, but we have taken our talking about it to greatheights: speaking, full of ﬁoriture, trills, and singing in a poetic tone, with falsepoetic sentimentality and with equally false poetic exultation. This category isexcellent for funerals so I assume it will be mobilized for this occasion. In myopinion, Polish poetry (but perhaps all poetry) will not budge until it breaks withthree terrible clichés: (1) the attitude of the poet; (2) poetic tone: (3) poetic form.Do what you want! Try to crawl out of this through the doors or windows, it’s all thesame to me, but as long as you stay inside, nothing will save you.
Friday
‘‘Tourists from stork nests.’’*Straszewicz is a squire on his manor, equal to a palatine,† something veryPolish, a descendant of Rej and Potocki, grandson of Sienkiewicz, and also Weich’scousin, which arouses conﬁdence in wide circles of admirers. Although Strasze-wicz is, among other things, a caricaturist of Polishness, he is one of our own,someone familiar and that in spite of everything: the old tastes, the old banner, theold emotional nobility. Almost. Practically. Just practically because all this is purely‘‘functional’’ in Straszewicz. Straszewicz is yesterday’s Polishness torn away from itsfoundation and radiating in a vacuum, acting on impetus. Is he belated then?No! Humor . . . humor . . . if Straszewicz were stripped of his humor, hewould be completely impossible, he would be spiritually and intellectually indolentin the current reality, equal to . . . Well, why name names, practically all the names?Humor is an inversion of everything and to such an extent that a real humorist cannever be only that which he is. He is both that which he is and that which he isn’t.The hand that wrote ‘‘Won a lock, lost a lock’’ is the hand of a perverse Gogol and
*A colloquialism meaning Poles abroad.†‘ ‘Szlacheic na zagrodne rowny wojewodsie.’’ ‘‘A squire on his manor equals a palatine’’ was adeclaration of equal rights of the nobility from the times of the noble republic.1954125under its touch, Straszewicz becomes anti-Straszewicz, and the synthesis of thisthesis and antithesis gives us Straszewicz, who is still Straszewicz but Straszewiczalready slightly out-distancing Straszewicz. Let us draw our conclusions from this:that in moments when devastating conditions force us to a complete inner transfor-mation, laughter is our last resort. It draws us out of ourselves and allows ourhumanity to survive independently of the painful changes in our shell.No nation has needed laughter more than we do today. And never has anation understood laughter’s liberating role less.Our laughter today, however, can no longer be an elemental, that is,automatic laughter. It must be premeditated laughter, humor applied coldly andwith gravity, it must be a serious application of laughter to our tragedy. On abroader scale than Straszewicz does it. That laughter, dictated by awful necessities,should encompass not only the world of enemies, but above all us ourselves andthat which is dearest to us.The author of ‘‘Tourists from Stork Nests’’ addressed me in an article aboutTrans-Atlantic. I record my retort, as it sets the tone for my other statements. This isone of my ﬁrst appearances in the Polish press after fourteen years of absence. When,after having been born in my native tongue for the second time, I assessed thesituation, I noticed that it was declining at full tilt. In Poland, literature has beenseized by the throat and in emigration it has been ‘‘submitted to service,’’ to the ser-vice of ideals, the homeland, readers, everything except its own principles and desti-nies. As a result of this, I have decided to respond not as a soldier but as a civilian.Here is what I wrote under the title ‘‘Marginal Reﬂections on Straszewicz’’:
‘‘Risum teneatis’’ appeared not long ago and once again I must respond. Isn’tthe public bored stiff by these polemics? Has not the tone of our literary pressbecome excessively intimate?It does not seem bad to me that literati write about themselves andargue with each other—on the condition that their persons will be a bridge tohigher matters, to universal problems.
BBB
It would seem that I am that conceited creature that puffs itself up with‘‘talent’’ while he, Straszewicz, pays homage to virtuous modesty. The reverse,however, is true. I say: I attempt to have talent. And what does Straszewicz126Volume 1say? He says: I have talent, but . . . look! . . . I gave it up as an offering tothe homeland!So I claim that Straszewicz’s talent will never realize itself completely,as Straszewicz lacks something that is indispensable: a respect for talent.With what sort of absolutely Polish impertinence does our Czes™awspeak about these values! He is full of scorn for egotists and egocentrics, whodare take ‘‘talent’’ seriously at a moment when a real drama is taking place: thehomeland is being defeated.So what is this thing called ‘‘talent’’? If idiots imagine a writer as a guywho sits in a café and, other than that, writes successful novels and short storiesfrom time to time with the help of that vague, mysterious ‘‘talent,’’ then it is hightime for their opinions to undergo reform. A writer does not write with anymysterious ‘‘talent’’ but with ‘‘himself.’’ That means, he writes with his sen-sitivity and intelligence, heart and mind, with his entire spiritual developmentand that intensity, that steady excitement of the spirit, which Cicero says is theessence of all rhetoric. There is nothing mysterious, nothing esoteric in art.I can say without exaggeration that I ‘‘devoted myself ’’ to literature. Forme, literature is not a matter of a career and future monuments but the excavat-ing from myself of the maximum value of which I am capable. If it were to turnout that that which I write is inconsequential, then I am defeated not only as awriter but as a man. Yet Straszewicz and his ilk treat literature as an appendixto existence and its ornament. They are inclined to tolerate the existence ofwriters as long as nothing really serious begins to happen.Mi™osz was also attacked along these philosophical lines. Ah yes! Thatcrazy aesthete left the country because he noticed he couldn’t write poems there!The country doesn’t concern him, neither does the suffering of the people, justhis poems! It is my belief that people who voice such opinions have not grownup enough to handle these problems. Neither art nor the homeland meansmuch in and of itself. They mean very much, however, when a man bindshimself, through them, to the real and profoundest values of being.
BBB
Cowardice! Lack of patriotism! A strange thing! Trans-Atlantic is themost patriotic and most courageous thing I have ever written. Yet it is exactlythis work that draws ﬁre to me for being a coward and a bad Pole.1954127Notice that I could have left those moments of my life alone. I couldhave written a book with completely different themes. No one reproached mewith anything until I myself brought it on by publishing fragments of Trans-Atlantic.Don’t allow yourselves to believe that you have caught me in the act. Imyself, voluntarily and freely, admitted to having certain feelings . . . but thedisclosure of these emotional states (which even you—privately and quietly—must have occasionally experienced) was neither cynicism nor shamelessness onmy part. I could allow myself this because I had very grave reasons and becauseI was being directed by a consideration for the common good.What kind of reasons?I feel that currently Polish literature ought to adopt a direction diame-trically opposed to that which it has taken thus far. Instead of striving for asintimate a bond as possible between a Pole and Poland, it should get to work oncreating a certain distance between ourselves and the Homeland. We mustsevere ourselves emotionally and intellectually from Poland in order to gain agreater freedom of action, in order to be able to create it.We must, I believe, become aware of the temporary character of ourcurrent Polishness. Without this we will not be capable of keeping up withthe world.
BBB
One can disagree with this. One can ﬁght this. But let’s not haveStraszewicz demanding that I serve the Homeland, not in accordance with mybest understanding, but only in a way that he considers right.In that case, I would have an equal right to call Straszewicz a badPole because, from my vantage point, the emotional patriotism that he rep-resents has done the most damage. It has deeply inﬂuenced our politicsand, what is worse, our culture. Listen to what the world is saying about us.Consider how foreigners see and feel us. We are a paragon of spasmodicpatriotism.Straszewicz says to a man like myself: Go, sir, to the army! Fight foryour homeland! If I felt like ﬁghting, then it would be against the homeland formy human worth. Straszewicz would not have to encourage me to do battlewith Hitler and ﬁght on behalf of tormented humanity in Poland because,128Volume 1independently of my opinions of the homeland, I know the extent of thatsuffering and I do not intend to wriggle away with ‘‘concepts’’ while a crime isbeing committed.Still . . .I do not conceal that, just like Straszewicz, I was afraid. Perhaps I wasnot so afraid of the army and war as of the fact that in spite of my bestintentions, I could not handle them. I am not made for these things. Mine is adifferent realm. My development has always moved in a different direction. As asoldier, I would have been a catastrophe. I would have brought disgrace uponmyself and you.Do you think that patriots such as Mickiewicz and Chopin did not takepart in the struggle out of simple cowardice? Or perhaps because they did notwant to make fools of themselves? They probably had the right to defend them-selves before that which exceeded their strength.Perhaps these confessions are awkward and unnecessary. Perhaps itwould be enough to say that at the time when the war broke out I had an armycategory ‘‘C,’’ and that when I reported to a medical commission at the consu-late in Buenos Aires, I was given a category ‘‘D.’’Enough of this alphabet. I prefer to wrap this up.
BBB
One has to admit that Straszewicz is wonderfully noble. I respect hisvirtues, do not diminish his attainments, and I have sympathy for his writer’spredicament, but this article smells of Pasek’s  Memoirs. Straszewicz invokes judgments against Mi™osz and Gombrowicz. What does this mean? Onceagain, then, instead of a serious discussion, we are given a sejm,* hullabaloo, and commotion. Once again profound letters—written by various fans kickingup their heels, protests, counterprotests, attacks, and jibes—addressed ‘‘Respect-ful Editor.’’ Has that frog’s croaking coming from the stagnant waters of yourpond repulsed you yet?No. You may judge me only by reading my works more carefully, in thecalm and quiet of your conscience.
*A political or debating assembly, with the connotation of being unruly.1954129Sunday
With the deepest humility, I confess that I, a mere worm, had the Spiritappear to me yesterday and hand me a Program, made up of ﬁve points:
1. To restore conﬁdence, pride, momentum, and ﬂight to a Polish literaturethat is fatally one-dimensionalized, weak, and pusillanimous.2. To base it solidly on the ‘‘I,’’ to make the ‘‘I’’ constitute its sovereignty andpower, to ﬁnally introduce that ‘‘I’’ into Polish . . . but emphasize itsdependence on the world. . . .3. To switch it to the most modern tracks and not at a snail’s pace, but with ajump, like this, straight out of the past into the future (les extrêmes setouchent). To draw it into the most complex issues, into the most painfulcomplexities . . . yet to teach it lightness and how to maintain distance. . . .To teach it contempt for the idea and cult of the personality.4. To change its relation to form.5. To Europeanize it but, at the same time, to exploit all its possibilities tooppose it to Europe.
At the bottom appeared the ironic: sausage is not for dogs!*
Saturday
I headed for where the light blinds you. First a three-day trip by car to acertain city, bursting with sunlight. There the roads ended. Seventy kilometers stilldivided us from the estancia, so we ﬂew over them by plane.
Country Diary
Saturday
We landed smoothly in a meadow, not far from trees, scattering the sheepishcows—sheep were also grazing close by—and I disembark, but really have no ideawhich direction is south, which north, and generally do not understand what is going
*A Polish saying meaning ‘‘it’s too good for the likes of you,’’ ‘‘you haven’t grown up to it.’’130Volume 1on, because I sweat so much that I exhaust myself and the air is so thin and heated thatit dances before my eyes. . . . A manor amid eucalyptus trees, broken by parrots cawing.The sun draws my eyes shut with its little paw, I walk among the trees, butSergio is saying something and a large bird takes wing—I sweat—takes wing and Isweat—and I hear him say, how about going hunting, but I am sweating. I amsweating and am somewhat nervous! Grumpy. And ﬁnally I am bored by the fact thatthis fellow always does what is expected of him. When food is served he sits at thetable, when it is late he yawns, and when we come to the country he suggests hunting.I asked that he quit boring me with banalities and try to be less predictable. He saidnothing. Flies buzz.
Sunday
I awoke quite late and tried to ﬁgure out where I was but that was not easybecause the beating sun does not allow you to open your eyes. I see only the sandy soilunderfoot and, I guess, ants. I tried to lift my gaze and glanced to the right but a cowwas there and when I looked to the left, another cow was on that side. I walkedstraight ahead among the sunny waves slipping through the lanes, I know there is atree ahead. Sergio, who accompanied me, climbed the tree. I asked him if he couldn’tthink of something more original? Instead of answering, he climbed down, butprobably without the tree. I say ‘‘probably’’ because from under my lowered lids, Icouldn’t see and, who cares, I am melting.
Monday
I think about my work, my place in literature, my responsibility, my destinyand vocation.But a mosquito buzzes on my left, no, right, green melts into blue, parrotssquawk and until now, I couldn’t get a good look because ﬁrst, I don’t really feel likeit, and, second, I am melting. I assume that there are palm trees, cacti, brush,pasturelands, swamps or marshes, but I don’t know for sure. I saw a path, took it, itled to bushes that smelled like tea, but it was not tea, then I saw Sergio’s legs fromunder the wings of my hat, close by, on the left. What was he doing here? Did he want1954131to accompany me on the walk? In a ﬁt of irritation I asked, will he ever stop beingconventional, at which his legs as if rose from the ground and began stepping aboveit, about ﬁfteen centimeters in the air. This lasted a few minutes. Then they camedown and trod the earth. . . . I used the words ‘‘as if ’’ because I did not believe thatthis was possible and I was sweating and the hat, glare, and shrubbery limited myﬁeld of vision. Mandioka.
Tuesday
Nothing happened. If I am not mistaken, a whole herd of horses is watchingme and cows, too, are looking at me in great numbers.The evenings are cooler yet in spite of this, my head is compote, my bonessprawl. Sergio lit a curtain instead of a cigarette at supper and I was ready to screambut as it turned out, he didn’t light it altogether, that is, not completely, ratherhalfway, to the astonishment of his parents, which was also half-hearted, and I said,in a mood of some sort of benevolent condescension—well, well, Sergio, so what areyou up to?
Wednesday
I am melting and dissolving but everything else is dissolving, too, where isnorth, where is south, I know nothing, maybe I am seeing the landscape upside down,but I see no landscape only little ﬂies, stalks, lines, the tremulous atmosphere, thebuzzing, drowning in light. Sergio, on the other hand, begins to amaze me. Today atbreakfast he amazed us somewhat by somehow turning so that, having entered thedining room, it was as if he had walked into the dining room once again, that is,somehow from the inside, yes, it was as if he had walked into the inside from insidewhich then allowed him to leave the inside to go to the inside to go to the inside andthen only from the inside to the outside. . . . I say ‘‘as if,’’ ‘‘somehow,’’ because all ofthis was happening only to a certain degree, but undoubtedly this boy is movingfurther and further away from cliché. His parents reprimanded him, but only to acertain extent because it is impossible to concentrate when the sweat pours down yourbody and everything grows blurry. . . .132Volume 1Thursday
If not for my sweating, I would feel profoundly disturbed, and maybe evenafraid, as very strange things are happening. At noon, in the most intense heat andtremulousness, Sergio was mounting a horse. To the amazement of not only hisparents, but also the entire estancia, he did not quite get on his horse, and not quitegalloped after which he somewhat dismounted and went to his room, just like that,not quite enough. I had a lengthy conversation with his parents, who did not concealtheir concern, which melted along with them in the tropical heat and as a conse-quence of this conversation, I turned to Sergio with the request that he be morepredictable in the future. He answered that ever since I had opened his eyes tounknown possibilities, he felt like a king and did not intend to abdicate. I did not likeit at all and I indicated all the impropriety of these games, to which he replied: Good,good, yes, naturally, I think, however, that you are right. . . . This ‘‘however’’ indi-cated that he was still clinging to his indirectness, incompleteness, that, however, hewas trying to take advantage of that murkiness, fogginess, prolixity of everything forhis own purposes, that taking advantage of the fact that we, nolens volens, mustclose our eyes to this, he would do mischief perhaps not quite and would take libertiesnot quite entirely. . . .The conversation had no positive effect, especially because, at the same time,we were taking a path that led into the brush near the swamp and at a given momentI noticed that I was in the cane and next to me, in addition to Sergio’s legs, Chango’sand Cumba’s feet, two farmhands from the estancia. Then something horrible hap-pened. Namely, everyone stopped (I did, too) and Sergio’s hand gave me a riﬂe whilehis other hand suddenly indicated something in the shape of a triangle, in a yellow-green-blue light shadow there, in the bushes. . . . I shot.A thunderclap shook the whole place. . . .Something swished, darted, disappeared. After that nothing but the buzzingof mosquitoes. So I walked with them in the heat and shortly found myself home. Acrocodile. Crocodile! A crocodile, shot, but not sufﬁciently; not quite killed, hit, butnot enough . . . and he now shoots everything around him. In addition to this, a blastthe blast that also shot through and what was worse, sealed shut, yes, sealed shut!!!The hellish scorching of the sun. Sweat and a ﬂash, bewilderment, laziness, and thecrocodile, not quite a crocodile over there. . . . Sergio didn’t say anything but I knew1954133he was game for this . . . and it didn’t surprise me at all when he not quite, but alreadyopenly, ﬂew to a branch and gave out a chirp. Why not! Now, to a certain degree,now, whatever happens, he can allow himself everything.I am somehow preparing myself for ﬂight. I pack my suitcase to an extent.The crocodile, not quite, not quite a crocodile! Sergio’s parents have almost gotteninto the buggy harnessed to four horses and are almost growing distant . . . almost ina hurry. . . . Hot. Heatwave. Scorching heat.
XII
Saturday
I am taking a walk with Karol ´Swierczewski, along the streets of San Isidro:villas, gardens. From the hilltop, in the distance, we see a motionless river color deleon, and on the right-hand side in the shade of eucalyptus trees the white, century-old home of the Pueyrredons, its closed windows shining, vacant from the timethat Prilidiano left. A largely arbitrary bond has arisen between the house and me.It began one day when strolling by I thought ‘‘and what would happen if this housebecame close to me, if it intruded upon my fate and for no reason other than that itis entirely alien to me?’’ Right after that came the thought: ‘‘And why did this houseamong so many houses suggest this wish to you, why exactly this one?’’ Right awaythis thought led to that one and from then on, I really did attach myself to thePueyrredon house. So that now the light, the shrubbery, the walls, elicit greaterand greater emotion—and uneasiness—in me each time, and whenever I am here,I break down under the inarticulated burden and somewhere on the border, at theextreme ends of my being a shout, violence, a terrifying panic explodes . . . and it isvery characteristic of me, yes, it is right, that none of these experiences of fear,depression, sorrow, despair, is ﬂesh. They are like the contours of emotions andthereby even more painful, ﬁlled with nothing, so completely pure. And this heavypain does not intrude on my conversation with ´Swierczewski.We talk about Father Maciaszek, but the Pueyrredon house is now in theback, behind me, and the fact that I do not see it strengthens its existence. Ac-cursed house that invaded me. The less I see it, the more it exists. There, see,behind me, there it is! There it is! There it is exaggerated to madness and it is and is134Volume 1with its windows and neoclassical columns and instead of disintegrating when Imove away from it, it exists even more than before. Why it? Why, this shouldn’t bethe house that accompanies me, hounds me, other houses are my houses, whyshould somebody else’s house, this alien white existence in this garden tug at meand attack me? But I am talking to ´Swierczewski. I know that I am not supposed tobe interested in this! I am not supposed to ﬁnd myself here! Where then? Where ismy place? What am I supposed to do? Where am I supposed to be? My native landis not my place nor is the house of my parents, no thought, no word, no, the truth isthat I have no other home except that one, yes, unfortunately, unfortunately, theonly house I have is that uninhabited, that white Pueyrredon house! Speaking ofFather Maciaszek, we move farther away from the Pueyrredon house. He, ´Swier- czewski, is also as if he were not and, absent, he rubs a dried weed into dust.
Tuesday
In Poland the tower of a too aristocratic culture crashed and everythingthere, except for the factory chimneys, will become dwarfed in this and the nextgeneration. Should we, the Polish intelligentsia in exile, shrivel up because of this?This is strange but true: even though we have been suspended in a void, eventhough we constitute a dying class, a ‘‘superstructure’’ deprived of a ‘‘base,’’ eventhough there will be fewer and fewer people capable of understanding us, we mustcontinue to think in an unsimplistic and unprimitive way, in a way that is inkeeping with our level, just as if nothing at all had changed in our situation. Wemust simply because this is natural in us and nobody should be more stupid thanhe is. We must realize ourselves completely and speak our bit out to the last letter,because only phenomena capable of a ruthless life have the right to exist.
Wednesday
I know well what sort of Polish culture I would like to have in the future.The only question is: am I not spreading a program that is only my personal needon an entire people. This is it: the weakness of today’s Pole results from his beingtoo monolithic, and too one-sided; therefore, all effort should be aimed at enrich-1954135ing him by one more pole, at completing him with another Pole, an absolutely,radically different Pole.I have already written elsewhere about this alter ego of ours that urgentlydemands a hearing. History has forced us to exaggerate certain characteristics ofour nature and we are what we are excessively. We are overstylized. And even moreso because when we feel in ourselves the presence of those other possibilities, wedesire to eliminate them violently. How, for example, does the matter of ourmanhood present itself? For a Pole (as opposed to the Latin race) it is not enoughthat he is a man to a certain degree, he wants to be even more of a man than he is,one could say that he imposes the man upon himself, he is the eradicator of hisown womanhood. And, if one considers that history has always forced us to amilitary and martial life, that psychic violence becomes understandable. It is thisfear of femininity that causes us to make rigid decisions which turn against us, andthat marks in us the clumsiness of persons who fear that they will not be up to theirtheory; we ‘‘want to be’’ like this, rather than that, too much, and the result is thatwe ‘‘are’’ too little.If we look closely at our other national characteristics (such as love of thehomeland, faith, virtue, honor . . . ) we will then see our excessiveness in all ofthem, resulting in the fact that the type of Pole that we have evolved must stiﬂe anddestroy the type that we could have been and that exists in us as an antinomy. Yet itwould seem from this that the Pole is impoverished exactly by one-half of himself,in addition to which even the half that is allowed to be heard cannot appear in anatural way. I opine that the moment has come to activate this other personality ofours; today, not only because we must of necessity become more relaxed, moreﬂexible toward the world; not only because this operation demands an immeasur-able spiritual freedom, which has become possible for us beyond the boundaries ofthe country, but most of all because this is the only gauge truly capable of inspiringus with a new vivacity and opening new lands before us.We will discover that other Pole when we turn against ourselves. At thattime contrariness should become the dominant characteristic of our development.We will have to give ourselves over to contrariness, seeking in ourselves that whichwe do not want, before which we recoil. Literature? We ought to have a literaturethat is exactly the opposite of that which has been written up to now. We must136Volume 1become the iconoclasts of our own history, relying only on our present for it isexactly history that has been our hereditary ﬂaw. History imposes upon us anartiﬁcial conception of ourselves and forces us to simulate historical deductioninstead of living our own reality. The most painful thing, though, will be to attackPolish style and Polish beauty in ourselves, to create a new mythology and newcustom from the other half of our globe, from that other pole—to broaden andenrich our beauty in such a way that a Pole could like himself in two opposingforms—as he who is right now and he who destroys the one who he is.Today it is not in the least a matter of enduring in the legacy left us byprevious generations, it is a matter of winning out over it. Poor is a Polish culturethat only binds and shackles; worthy of recognition, creative and alive is one thatbinds and liberates in a single stroke.
Friday
Yesterday (Thursday) a cretin began to bother and worry me all day. Per-haps it would be better not to write about this . . . but I do not want to be a hypocritein this diary. It began when I ﬁrst went to Acasusso to Mr. Alberto H.’s (an indus-trialist and engineer) for breakfast. At ﬁrst glance, his villa seemed too Renaissance,but not betraying this impression, I sat down at the table (also Renaissance) andbegan to eat dishes whose Renaissance in the course of eating became more andmore obvious at which time the conversation, too, settled on the Renaissance untilﬁnally and completely openly and even passionately one began to adore Greece,Rome, naked beauty, the call of the ﬂesh, evoe, Pathos and Ethos (?) and evensome column or other on Crete. When it got to Crete, the cretin crawled out,crawled out (?) and crept up but not in Renaissance manner (?!) but quite neo-classically cretinously (?) (I know that I should not write about this, this soundsrather odd).At four I left, extremely tired, and there were trees, leaves, houses—mixed,perhaps somewhat too tidy, and, I would say, not much to the point. Never mind.Leaving the subway, I was on my way to the Café Rex when out of the Café Paris(nor do I know why one café got mixed up with the other) some of my lady friends,who were supposed to be sitting at a table and eating ladyﬁngers and dipping themin cream, began to beckon (?) to me. The mystiﬁcation appeared right away1954137because, actually, they were sitting at an enamel tabletop set on four bent prongs,and the eating consisted of sticking this or that thing through the opening in theface during which the ears and noses stuck out and the heels, too, stuck out fromunder the table, that is, out from under the tabletop. Yak, yak, about this and thatbut I see that this or that sticks out (?) and protrudes (??) from this or that woman,therefore, I ﬁnally excuse myself and leave, pleading lack of time.Sociologically.I do not really know if I should continue these confessions. The publicist’sduty compels me to inform the public that rather too cretinous things are happen-ing . . . too cretinous to be revealed and, I believe, on this all speculation relies—that an excess of cretinism does not allow these things to be revealed, that this isalready too stupid to be expressed. Leaving the Café Paris, I went to the Café Rex.There an unknown gentleman who approached me and, having introduced him-self as Zamszycki (maybe I heard this wrong), said that he had wanted to make myacquaintance for a long time. I said that it was my pleasure and then he thankedme, bowed, and left. Furious, I wanted to call him a cretin when, at that moment, Inoticed that he was not a cretin because, after all, he had wanted to meet me anddid, therefore, it was right that he should leave. Then I started to think: cretin ornot? In the meantime, ﬁrst one streetlight went on, then another, and when thesecond went on, a third lit up, then a fourth and with the fourth a ﬁfth. Hardly hadthe ﬁfth lit up when the sixth and the seventh go on, eighth, ninth, yet, at the sametime, one, two, ﬁve cars go by; one, two, ten trams; people are coming, one, two,ten, ﬁfteen; before me, one, two, three houses; the ﬁrst, second, third, fourth, ﬁfth,sixth, seventh story and on the seventh, a balcony and on the balcony, who? Whobut Henry and his wife! Beckoning to me.I beckon. Yet I see, though not too clearly, that they are saying somethingand beckoning to me at the same time. Cars, trams, people, movement, crowds,neons are going on, glare from all over, a honking, ringing, and they there on theseventh story are talking. And again they beckon. I nod. I see: she beckons, hebeckons. So I do, too. Then I look (really, I don’t know how to articulate this, this isalready a bit brash, however, I am not allowed to conceal anything) and he beck-oned into himself, like into a bottle. I beckon. Then she (but no, no, I cannot makea cretin of myself; yet if I am to reveal the Cretin, I have to make a cretin of myself )then she beckoned out of him until he and she beckoned (but WHAT did she138Volume 1beckon to) after which both lightly beckoned themselves out there and alone andpoof. . . . (Ha! This I cannot say, it is beyond my powers!)
Monday
Every once in a while I sense certain foggy allusions to my person in variousarticles. Perhaps I am mistaken? Whom, if not me, does Mr. Juliusz Sakowski havein mind when he speaks of ‘‘dogmatic iconoclasts and sacristans of suspect initia-tions’’? At whom, if not at me, does Mr. Goetel aim his phrase about ‘‘the grimacingat the traditional Polish attitude by some exiles, aspiring to the title of intellectuals’’?Probably even in Mr. Grubinski’s Greco-Roman, Parisian-Athenian, Thucydides-Gibbonesque feuilleton. ‘‘A Brawl! A Brawl!’’ casts me a light, oh, ever so light,sidelong glance.I would not be surprised if he were not wrong for, really, I must be asomewhat unnerving phenomenon. It is something else, however, that is ludicrousto me. Namely, that from the selection of epithets with which I am strewn it seemsthat none of these people has the slightest notion of what I am. The adjective‘‘blasé’’ in no way ﬁts me; the word ‘‘escapist’’ would demand considerable elabora-tion; ‘‘intellectual’’ is wide of the mark; and ‘‘free-thinking aesthete’’ is also quiteuseless. They all miss the mark because they have not read any of my books or, ifthey have, then they did so sloppily.
Thursday
Zygmunt Grocholski’s vernissage in Galatea. Portfolios full of engravingson the table. Large surfaces soaked in color on the walls. Compositions frozenin proud abstraction look down from the walls onto the sloppy human anthill; amob of disorderly two-legged creatures tumbling past in wild disarray. On thewalls: Astronomy. Logic. Composition. In the gallery: Confusion. Imbalance. Anexcess of unorganized detail, which overﬂows on all sides. Accompanied by theDutch painter Gesinus, I comment on one of the engravings, on which certainmasses are harnessed by the slanted tensions of lines and are like a horse reined inand frozen in a leap, when someone’s behind nudges under my rib cage. I jump1954139back. This turns out to be a photographer, bent over and aiming his box at themore important guests.Thrown off balance, I try, nevertheless, to compose myself. In the presenceof Alice de Landes, I feel myself drifting into a certain colorful fugue subject to itsown laws when something rolls over me like a water buffalo or hippopotamus,barbarian style. . . . Who? The photographer, stretched beyond all endurance,shooting doublets en face and proﬁles.I collect myself as quickly as I can and, seeing some French acquaintanceswho were weighing the inner logic of one of the linear arrangements with AldoPellegrini, the author of the foreword to the catalog, I walk over to them whenwhom should I stumble over? The photographer! I turn to say something un-pleasant to him when, suddenly, a face looms before me. An unfamiliar face. Anda familiar face. Familiar? Unfamiliar? Whose? The face looks at me and sud-denly blurts out: ‘‘Whom do I see! Well, well, two mountains meet! Why, it’sbeen ages!’’I said: Of course. Ah, what a meeting! . . . A pit. Darkness. Emptiness. Idon’t know him. I don’t remember him. Anguish. The photographer leaps up,holds up his camera, snap, it’s all over. He hands me a bill, twenty pesos. I pay thetwenty pesos and take the receipt. Enraged that after all his elbowing and bump-ing, he had to snap my picture at the very moment that I was gaping at anunrecalled face, I went home, I, a child of chaos, son of darkness, blind coinci-dence, and absurdity.At home I had the crazy thought: Hey, maybe that was Kowalski, the one Ihad met in Mendoza. Was it Kowalski or not? If only I could see his face onceagain, the memory of his face has become blurry.Then I remembered the photograph! Why I’ll have his face in the photo!Suddenly the mysterious logic governing that photographer struck me as if I hadsuddenly seen the most perfect balance of planes and dynamic tensions in Zyg-munt’s illustration. I ran to the address on the receipt.O malicious fate! O perverse logic! Diabolical composition! Of course,there was a logic, but one leading to ultimate degradation. When I reached thehouse indicated on the receipt, I was told:—You, too, have a receipt, sir? Many people have already been here today.140Volume 1That photographer was a scoundrel, sir, who put a ﬁctional address on the receiptand only pretended to be taking photographs. . . .(He also stole Rebinder’s coat.)
Wednesday
Once again a certain woman (because it is usually a woman, but this one isa woman-enemy who does battle with me) accuses me of egotism. She writes: ‘‘Tome, sir, you are not eccentric, but egocentric. This is simply a stage in yourdevelopment (vide Byron, Wilde, Gide). Some pass from this to the next phasewhich may be even more extreme but others don’t go anywhere at all and remainﬁxed in their egos. This is a tragedy but a private one. It enters neither the Pan-theon nor history.’’Platitudes? Only a madman would soberly demand that a man not occupyhimself with himself, that he not concern himself with himself, and that, in brief,he not take himself for himself. That woman demands that I forget that I am I, yetshe knows quite well that if I have an appendix attack, it will be I that will bescreaming not she.The colossal pressure to which we are subjected today from all sides just togive up our own existence leads only to a warping and falsifying of life as does everypostulate that is unrealistic. The person who is so dishonest with himself that hecan say: someone else’s pain is more important to me than my own, immediatelyfalls into this ‘‘easiness’’ that is the mother of verbalism and all generalities andeverything that is too easily made lofty. As for me: No, never, never, never. I am.Especially an artist who lets himself be taken in and submits to that aggres-sive convention is lost. Do not allow yourselves to be intimidated. The word ‘‘I’’ isso basic and inborn, so full of the most palpable and thereby the most honestreality, as infallible as a guide and severe as a touchstone, that instead of sneering atit, it would be better to fall to your knees before it. I think rather that I am not yetfanatical enough in my concern with myself and that I did not know how, out offear of other people, to surrender myself to this vocation with enough of a categori-cal ruthlessness to push the matter far enough. I am the most important andprobably the only problem I have: the only one of all my protagonists to whom Iattach real importance.1954141To commence creating myself and to make a character like Hamlet or DonQuixote out of Gombrowicz— — —? — — —!
Thursday
Today’s at N.’s tea, several Argentine literati got together from out of no-where. X read us his story about a young worker and his mother, who saw Christ inStalin. I listened in acute boredom to this edifying, sentimental story which wasmore religious than literary. Then a discussion erupted and Chamco accuratelyemphasized all the conventions and banalities that bristle in this text. I did notparticipate. I could have said the following: that no bourgeois literature has falsi-ﬁed the peasant and worker to this degree. This sad honor has been the work ofCommunist writers because they have set the proletariat on a pedestal and thiscould have disastrous consequences because this idealization will result in theintelligentsia’s gradual loss of control over the force which it brought to life.In the long run, it may turn out to be fatal that they, those intellectuals, goconsistently daft on the subject of the proletariat.X, in responding to Chamco’s reproaches, talked about the necessity ofsimpliﬁcation. He claimed that he would be happy if he could reduce psychologyto its most elementary aspect and his literary language to the most important eighthundred words. He also said that art must adjust itself to the humble folk, no, hedoes not write for reﬁned intellectual critics but for the people!That mystical, fanatical face seemed like such darkness to me and I re-membered how in my childhood, in the country, in the evening, next to the lamp,sometimes, in the quiet, in the stillness, I felt that something was happeningendlessly, something demonic—and that is how I suddenly saw his face: as if it werebeing given up to the Process. There is something demonic in the fact that asuperior, cultured man limits himself for the sake of a simpleton. This even ap-peals to me a little . . . and hardly anything amazes me more than this act ofviolence that Inferiority perpetrates on Superiority. Wasn’t there a dynamic ofviolence in this man and wasn’t he narrowed, stiﬂed, loaded with power, moreresilient? These suppressions that X was talking about, therefore, were not all thatalien to me. And I might have greeted them warmly if they had represented a realbond with people. But X was not devoted to people. He was devoted to doctrine.142Volume 1Theory was raping him. Basically, he did not (for even an instant) cease being‘‘superior’’ in relation to those workers whom he approached as a teacher andguide. It was not simple people but the ‘‘proletariat’’ that existed for him. Hereduced himself internally not because he was submitting to someone else’s in-feriority, but because he was fulﬁlling a program. The cheapness of these MarxistPimkos is unbearable! X’s formula was as follows: I, a mature man, give up myintelligentsia-like superiority in order to voluntarily serve the proletariat and tobuild, together with it, a rational world of the future. O brother, what garbage!These formulas of theirs have not drawn us closer to the proletariat by asingle inch. The mammoth issue of linking superiority to inferiority simply be-comes even more counterfeit.
Sunday
I went to Cecilia’s quinta near Mercedes with ‘‘Russo’’—Aleksander Russo-vich. For me, Russo is the embodiment of brilliant Argentine antibrilliance. Iadmire him. His brain is ﬂawless; his intelligence, marvelous. Quick, receptive.Imagination, imaginative ﬂight, poetry, humor. Culture. An easygoing perceptionof the world, free of complexes . . .Ease. The ease comes from the fact that he does not want to, does not knowhow to, exploit his strong points. A European would cultivate them like fertile soil.He would bend over himself, as over an instrument. Russo allows his attributes tobloom in their natural state. Having the possibility of being outstanding, he doesnot want to, does not know how to? distinguish himself. . . . He does not want toﬁght with people. Discretion. He does not want to impose himself.Goodness. His goodness disarms him. His attitude toward people is not sufﬁ-ciently rigorous. He does not wrestle with them, he does not throw himself at them.He is not someone who exists ‘‘in people.’’ For him, man has not become an obstacleto overcome. He is the son of Argentine relaxation: here each lives for himself,people are not piled one on top of the other; here man does not use another man (inthe spiritual arena) for a high-jump pole to jump higher; and man is not (spiritually)an object of exploitation. Next to him I am a wild animal.Argentina. He is not alone. This is still an ‘‘unpeopled’’ and undramaticland.1954143XIII
Thursday
That Portuguese fellow, Dede’s ﬁancé, asked me at one point where all ofmy contempt for women came from and immediately everyone agreed with him.Contempt? What! I adore women! Yet it is true that until now I have notbeen able to ﬁgure out what they are to me in the spiritual order of things, enemiesor allies? And this means that half of humanity is eluding my grasp.The ease of bypassing women! It is as if they did not exist! I see around memany people in skirts, with long hair, high voices, and in spite of this, I use theword ‘‘man’’ as if it were not broken into man and woman. I also do not notice thesplit that sex introduces into other words.To the Portuguese I replied that if one can talk of contempt at all, then it isonly on artistic grounds. . . . Yes, if it happens that I despise women, then it isbecause they are terrible priestesses of beauty and revealers of youth. I grow angrybecause they annoy and offend me as bad artists. Artists, yes, because charm is theirvocation and aesthetics their profession. They were born to fascinate, they are art tosome extent themselves. Yet what shoddy work! What cheating! Poor beauty! Andpoor youth! You found yourselves in women in order to go rancid! She is yourspeedy destroyer! Look! That girl is young and beautiful only with the aim ofbecoming a mother! Shouldn’t beauty or youth be something gratuitous, shouldn’tit serve no one, this marvelous gift of nature, its crowning glory? Yet in women thischarm serves to breed, it is allied to pregnancy, diapers, its highest manifestationcreates a child and that marks the end of the poem. A boy barely touches a girl,enchanted by her and by himself with her, and he is already a father, she, a mother,therefore, a girl is a creature that seems to practice youth but really serves toliquidate it.We, mortals, who cannot agree to death and with the fact that youth is onlya torch that is passed from hand to hand, will not stop rebelling against this brutalperﬁdy of nature. Yet this is not a matter of barren protests. The point is that thisdeadly relationship of a woman to her own girlish charms manifests itself all thetime and this is why she does not really feel her youth or beauty. She feels it lessthan a man. Look at that girl! How romantic . . . but this romanticism ends with a144Volume 1contract at the altar at the side of that fat lawyer. That poetry must become legal-ized, that love will begin to function with the permission of spiritual and layauthorities. How aesthetic . . . but there isn’t a bald, paunchy, or tubercular fellowthat would be sufﬁciently repugnant to her. She will give her beauty to uglinesswith ease and here we see her triumphing at the side of a monster, or, what isworse, at the side of one of those men who is the embodiment of petty revulsion.This is beauty that is not repulsed! Beautiful but not possessing a sense of beauty.And the ease with which a woman’s taste and her intuition go wrong in her choiceof men creates the impression of some sort of incomprehensible blindness andstupidity. She will fall in love with a man because he is so distinguished or so‘‘subtle.’’ Second-rate social values will be more important than the Apollonianoutlines of the body, soul, yes, she loves the sock not the calf, the mustache not theface, the jacket not the chest. She will be awestruck by the dirty lyricism of agraphomaniac; the cheap pathos of an idiot will overwhelm her; and the chic of anelegant fellow will lead her astray. She does not know how to unmask, she allowsherself to be deceived because she herself deceives. And she will fall in love onlywith a man from her ‘‘sphere’’ for she does not feel the natural beauty of the humanrace, only the secondary one that is a creation of her milieu. Ah, those slaves ofmajors, servants of generals, worshipers of merchants, dukes, doctors. Woman! Youembody antipoetry! She knows her own poetry as much as she knows a man’s andin this, is even clumsier. If these graphomaniacs, these painters of their ownbeauty, untalanted sculptors of their shapes, knew anything at all about the rulesgoverning beauty they would never do what they do with themselves. The lawsabout which I speak, known to each artist, proclaim:
1. An artist should not push his work under other people’s noses, crying: Thisis beautiful! Be enchanted by this because it is enthralling. Beauty shouldbe discreet and unimposing in a work of art, it should appear reluctantly, inthe margin of another aspiration.(Yet she is insistent about her beauty, perfecting it for hours before a mirror.She does not know what discretion is. She betrays herself all the time with herdesire to please and so is not a queen, but a slave and instead of appearing likea goddess, worthy of desire, she appears as terrible clumsiness trying to con-quer an inaccessible beauty. When a young boy plays ball for pleasure, he can1954145be beautiful; she plays ball in order to be beautiful, therefore, she plays badly,and, in addition to that, her beauty is bathed in perspiration, it is so forced.This is not all, however, because even while wheedling, always, everywhere,she pretends that she is not at all interested in men. And she says: Ah, I’m justdoing this for the aesthetics of it! Who would believe such outright lies?)2. Beauty cannot be based on duplicity (She desires that we forget about herugly sides. She tries to convince us that she is not a woman, that is, a body,which, like all bodies, can never be just beautiful, which is a mixture ofbeauty and ugliness, an eternal play of these two elements [and in this is abeauty of another, higher category]. No one will be able to arrange thingsso that certain bodily functions are not uncleanliness. Nor will anyonecompletely liberate the spirit of uncleanliness. Yet she wants us to believethat she is a ﬂower. She styles herself a goddess, ‘‘purity,’’ an innocent babe.Isn’t she comic in this absurd effort? And doomed to failure? What amasquerade! Am I supposed to believe that she is a bouquet of jasminebecause she has perfumed herself? Or, upon seeing her on heels a yardhigh, think that she is lithe? The only thing I see is that the heels do notallow her to move freely. This is how that beauty inhibits her and becomesher paralysis: that terrible inhibiting of the woman, which is manifest ineach of her movements, in her words, that curse, that she can never becomfortable with herself. . . .)(And in this female frenzy, she completely loses the feeling of the effect,openly cheats, judging that she will be able to infect us with her cowardly andmendacious notion of the body [and spirit]. Fashion! What monstrosity! Thatwhich is called elegance in Paris, all those lines, silhouettes, proﬁles, are theynot the most tasteless of mystiﬁcations, which depend on the overstylizationof the body? This woman adorns her exaggerated behind with a sash andthinks that she has become majestic; that one pretends to be a panther; andthis one tries to make her wilting complexion over into Melancholy with theaid of an elaborate hat. He who hides (for naught) the defect, however,submits to the defect. The defect must be overcome—overcome with realvalue in a moral or physical sense. The monsters offered to us by the Parisianfashion weeklies, those creations by Dior and Fath, with jutting hip, ﬂowingline, bent ﬁnger, frozen idiotic ‘‘distinction,’’ this from the vantage point of146Volume 1art, is the height of revulsion, kitsch arousing nausea, this is ridiculous, naive,and clumsily pretentious. This is bad taste cruder and more provocative thananything a drunken droshky driver could possibly manage to do.)3. Beauty is supposed to be supreme. (Maiden, ordinary milkmaid, hail Oqueen! Why, tell me, is there no mortal trembling in you that you will notbe accepted? You do not fear being rejected. You know that it is not beautythat makes you desirable, but sex—you know that a man will always desireyour femininity, even though it is not at all aesthetic. Your beauty, there-fore, is not at the service of your sex, it is not afraid, it does not quake, itdoes not exert itself and instead is calm, natural, triumphant. O unimpos-ing, reticent one. O distinguished one!)
Wednesday
Mortal are the sins of a woman from ‘‘society’’ in this temple of hers,aesthetics. Here is where she should feel most at home. To think that this is man’sinspiration, that these are our suppliers of lyricism, that we are to intoxicate our-selves on the wine from this barrel. Peerless is the primal beauty of woman, thatwith which nature adorned her. There is nothing more splendid or more thrillingand intoxicating than that man gained a younger companion, who is at once aservant and a master. There is nothing more wondrous than the tone that a womancontributes, that second voice that is the mysterious completion of manhood, theconception of the world on another scale, a separate interpretation, inaccessible tome. Why has this miracle undergone such a terrible vulgarization? Here one mustintroduce an important distinction: it is not the woman that is terrible but today’sfemininity. What is awful is not the individual woman but the style that has arisenamong women to which each woman succumbs. Who creates femininity? Men?Surely, man is the initiator, but afterward women themselves begin to perfect thisamong themselves and the art of misleading and enchanting, just like all others,grows and develops mechanically, automatically losing its sense of reality andsense of proportion. Today a woman is more of a woman than she should be: she isloaded with femininity, which is stronger than she is; she is the creation of a certainsocial convention, the consequence of a certain game, which pits man againstwoman until the dance grows and grows, becoming fatal.1954147What am I supposed to do with this? How am I supposed to behave? Ialways ﬁnd my way easily with the help of the same compass. Distance to form! Justas I aspire to ‘‘unburden’’ man, I must try to ‘‘unburden’’ woman. What does‘‘unburden’’ man mean? To get him out from under the yoke of that male style thatarises among men as a strengthening of masculinity, to have him feel that hismasculinity is something false, and that his own submission to it is weakness, tomake him feel freer in relation to the man in himself. The woman must be broughtout of the woman in the same way. Here, as in all of my writing, my goal—one ofmy goals—is to spoil the game, for as soon as the music dies and the couples breakup, an invasion of reality is possible and only then does it become clear to us thatthe game is not reality but a game. To bring uninvited guests to that ball of yours; tobind you differently to one another; to ruin your dance.It is possible and perhaps even certain that my literature is even moreextreme and crazy than I am. I don’t believe that this indicates lack of control,instead it is a taking of certain charms which are magniﬁed in the books to theirultimate formal conclusions. In me they remain that which they were, that is, onlya slight deviation of the imagination, a kind of light ‘‘inclination.’’ That is why,speaking concretely, I was never capable nor will I ever be capable of depictingordinary love in art, ordinary charm, because that love, that charm are cast into theunderground, stiﬂed, choked, that is why in this thing I am not ordinary butdemonic (grotesque demonism!); by showing the dangerous tensions of uncen-sored charms, by dragging a compromising lyricism out into the daylight, I wish toderail you. This is the rock that I am putting on your train tracks. To pull you out ofthe arrangement in which you ﬁnd yourself, so that you experience youth andbeauty, but experience it differently. . . .
Sunday
At Stanis™aw Odyniec’s in Mar del Plata. Late yesterday evening on thebeach in front of the casino: the usual whisper and splash. The rising and fallingchest of black water. A sudden burst of foam arcs and sizzles at my feet. Therein the south, the silhouette of houses on a hill, here, before me a mast and ﬂag, tothe left the rising and falling, broken pilings . . . sudden thunder. Spring! Thesummer season will not begin for another two months, so no one is here, it is still148Volume 1empty and quiet, the closed windows of hotels peer onto the beach where a dogmeanders and the wind moves ropes, whistles through cans left from last year’spreserves, rufﬂes papers. . . .The enormous emptiness of the city, deprived, emptied of six hundredthousand people, the death of these streets, squares, establishments, houses, stores,closed, blocked and gagged with human absence at the ocean, which regained theinviolability of its own existence and is only for itself. Quietly it invades the sand ofthe coast. . . . Wait! What is going on here? Something is happening but I don’tknow what. . . .What exactly? I am walking on the beach along the boundary of that foamand I am looking for the appropriate feeling in myself. What, what are you sup-posed to experience on the sand, which is under your feet again, in the ﬁsh and saltsmell of wind eternally the same. Can one experience eternity? Or perhaps dying?Or uncover God in this? Know one’s own nothingness or greatness? Know space ortime? Yet I cannot . . . something is in the way . . . that one terrible thing . . . that it isalready known, that it was said not once, but a thousand times . . . and evenprinted!And I have to be original!So I walk further along the edge of the same foamy line, head down,looking at the sand, listening to the eternal process but with a shackled heart—because I must be original, I am not allowed to repeat what someone else has said,and the most genuine emotion is forbidden to me only because someone else hasexperienced and expressed it. Wait, think this over . . . why, no one sees you here,there isn’t a living soul in those windows, there is nothing on the streets exceptasphalt and there are no crowds in the city—why shouldn’t you allow yourself anordinary thought about eternity, nature or about God, why are you straining andpursuing something new, unseen and astounding . . . even here on the coast wherea dog wanders? Look: here I stop in a salty freshness and silence, I take in at aglance the entire expanse of that loneliness and I waver . . . should I not surrendermyself to one of those ordinary and known truths? And now I smile . . . this isbecause (I remembered) that in one week in the Polish club in Buenos Aires therewill be a discussion of my books; and it is as if I were hearing the sour lamentations:that he works so hard to be original, that he has lost simplicity and thinks upfeelings, and all pour épater. . . . Now I am approaching a rocky shore, where there1954149is a great noise, water pounding at the boulders and crags. Iodine shoots into theair. Again the same summons in unchanging waves: be ordinary, be like the rest,you can, you know, there is no one here, now is the time for you to experiencesomething that has been experienced for centuries. . . .But I have to be original!No way! Nothing doing! So what if the city is without people? This absenceis unreal, they are in me and behind me, they are my tail and crest and they shout:be unusual . . . be new, think something up. Experience something unknown! Ismile with a certain embarrassment and look around timidly, I burrow my headinto my shoulders, after which, in the glory of my acting and in the descendingnight, I turn my face to the water. I stand that way in all the pride of my unsimplic-ity—as he who is coerced into originality—as an instrument of a terrible andincomprehensible collective spirit, who, wrestling with the eternal sameness of theocean, pushed forward to solutions unknown to it, bored with a violent impatiencefor that which is already known to it—desiring everything that is beyond it. I stand,annihilating today’s feelings in myself for the sake of tomorrow’s, killing the presenttense. . . .After which I walked home, through the emptiness of those streets—but Idid it as if I were being watched.
Saturday
My anger at women is the same anger that incites me to attack an affectedpoem, an ingratiating novel, all ineffectual art. They irritate me. The style of thistype of femininity is bad. Yet the point is not to take up once again the eternal duel,man versus woman, which warned our grandparents. If I am carrying on aboutthis, it is for other, more urgent, reasons.Woman is a key to man. This key can open a great deal, especially now inthe current day and age. For whom? Poles.One of the great problems of our culture is: opposing Europe. We will notbe a truly European people until we separate ourselves from Europe because beingEuropean does not mean fusing with Europe, but being one of its integral parts, avery distinct, integral part. Also: it is only our opposition to the Europe that hascreated us that may result in our ﬁnally becoming people with lives of our own.150Volume 1Therefore: Oppose the Polish woman to the European woman; or theEastern European woman to the Western woman; reach a point where she be-comes a separate inspiration. If you change the woman, you will change your taste,all likes and dislikes, you will attain new habits in life and art. Does such apossibility exist?If I did not notice the possibility, why would I rave about matters that wereimpossible to realize? I feel that the Pole—in spite of the stagnation of his thoughthere, in exile, and in spite of the terror that suffocates him there in the homeland,in spite of the emptiness that sucks on him here and there—feverishly seeks him-self. This means that we ﬁnd ourselves in a state of radical, basic, even recklessthought, and for us, there is no decision that is too extreme.Can we change our woman? Can a woman change for us?Up until now (speaking roughly and somewhat symbolically), Paris hasimposed a woman on us. That is why Paris reigns supreme in our imagination: thisalready repulsive song of Sarmatian Parisians intoxicated with charm, the electricspark of Ville Lumière. Paris is electro-erotic magic . . . nevertheless, have courage,become anti-Parisian. Try to see that entire erotic repulsiveness.Listen to the amorous language of the French bedchamber. Does it moveyou? Amuse you? Move you to tears? Or would you be more inclined to vomit itup, as one of the monstrosities of the world: that love in a negligée, those trium-phant underpants, those bourgeois capers in the ecstacy of heat? Tune in now totheir more sophisticated language of love. Which do you prefer? The intellectual-sensual language, which is the wisdom of a wise bald man analytically examininghis own ﬁts of passion, or the charming language of salons, which is what if not akicking up of frock coats, a dance of wigs, a male and female clothing shop,peppered to taste? The ugliness of the French love song is that it accepts theugliness. The Frenchman has agreed to the ugliness of civilization, he has evencome to like it. That is why a Frenchman does not relate to a naked woman, but toa dressed or undressed one. The French Venus is not a naked girl, but a Madamewith a beauty mark who is fort distinguée. It is not the smell of the body that exciteshim, but perfumes. He has come to adore all the artiﬁcial beauties such as charme, elegance, distinction, wit, costume, maquillage— the beauties with which biolog- ical decadence and middle age mask themselves. French beauty, therefore, is aforty-year-old beauty. And if that beauty has conquered the world then it is because1954151it is resignation. This is something accessible to older, wealthy ladies as well as topaunchy, middle-aged causeurs and bon vivants. One can live this up well into oldage. Resigned and realistic beauty sings: if you don’t have what you like, then youlike what you have!It is this French beauty, this type of French woman that has impressed itselfupon our Slavic wives of attorneys and upon the attorneys themselves. But Slavs!Didn’t at least your Slavic lyricism protest?! Why, an obsession with a differentwoman-girl lives in you. Why, you are idealists in erotic matters. Isn’t it exactly thiserotic idealism of yours that causes your inefﬁcacy in culture, which is and willremain the art of satisfying yourself with substitutes. Here all categoricalness oftaste does not pay off. We did not know how to come to terms with reality, that is,civilization, that is, with ugliness, and while the French slyly, intelligently, matter-of-factly perfumed, painted, and dressed up their nature (and did not look them inthe mouth), we dreamed . . . about immaculate Olenka, simple Zosia, nativeBasia . . . about (German’s) Ivona and (Zarzycka’s) Wild One. Even though thesewere our dreams, in the reality of our societal life, French beauty won out. Whywas a nation of Wokulskis incapable of overcoming the Parisian woman in itself?Exactly because she was closer to reality. Our ‘‘type’’ was good for dreaming, theirsfor living.Today, however, as a result of war and revolution, the roles have changed.Now, I believe, we have reality on our side, against Paris. Our idealism was vio-lated. Our daydream was trampled. What the devil! For a few solid years of theGerman occupation, you were touching naked being with an ungloved hand. Thepadded mattress that isolated you had vanished. Antaeus’s touch should have ﬁlledyou with power. After the war came Communism, that is, a further negation ofidealism and the dragging of woman down from heaven to earth. At any rate, froma higher sphere to a lower one, into the sphere of the proletariat. And this relates asmuch to women at home in Poland as to those who, in emigration, work asseamstresses, maids, salesclerks. . . .I know several of them.To what does this ex-lady aspire in the new circumstances? Not to stopbeing a lady for even a moment! She wants to dress elegantly, even though thatelegance must of necessity be impoverished. She wants to be fashionable, eventhough she cannot afford to buy the latest fashions. Her hats have remained152Volume 1Parisian, even though this is Paris third-hand. Her type still sighs after the salon,even though this can only be a salon déclassé. Her tastes and aesthetics are stillfrom the previous epoch: delicate. You can talk to her for hours and it would neveroccur to you that she has experienced something else, something very ruthless.If only you were more creative, O Polish woman. . . . At least—moredeliberate in leaning on your own strong points in your match with the world. Idon’t want to tempt you . . . but couldn’t you rebel inwardly against the woman youare, since you are no longer that woman? I demand nothing else from you except aspark of rebellion, to liberate your own reality. Be a woman ‘‘not of this world,’’ notof the world of the Western bourgeoisie. From what world are you supposed toderive? From the proletariat? How can that be if that, too, is not your element? Tryto be beyond one and the other, or rather, between one and the other. Allow yoursituation to dictate your style.It is not at all a matter of knowing what you want. It will be enough if youknow what you don’t want. The rest will take care of itself. Turn against thebeauty that is inaccessible to you. In this way, you will bring about a reform ofwomanhood.
Monday
Yesterday at the Polish Club, I dropped by right at the end of the steam-rollering of my soul and works. The paper that was positive about me was the workof Karol ´Swierczewski and Mrs. Jezierska read a paper against. A discussion fol-lowed at whose conclusion I appeared.Thomas Mann, an experienced connoisseur in these matters, said that anart that grows in the light of recognition from the very beginning will undoubtedlybe different from an art that must win a place for itself with difﬁculty, and at theprice of much humiliation. How would my work have looked if from its veryinception it had been crowned with a laurel wreath; if even today, so many yearslater, I did not have to devote myself to it as to something forbidden, shameful, andinappropriate? When I got to the auditorium, however, the majority greeted me ina friendly manner and I had the impression that things had changed quite a bitsince the time fragments of Trans-Atlantic appeared in Kultura. I attribute this1954153especially to the diary. I was also informed that the majority spoke out for me in thediscussion.Immersed in the rising and falling crowd, I felt somewhat like the marinersin the Odyssey: how many tempting sirens in these friendly faces coming up to me,coming to me! It would not be difﬁcult to throw my arms around these people andsay: I am yours and I have always been yours! Careful! Do not be bribed withsympathy! Don’t allow nauseating sentimentality and sweet understanding withthe masses, in which so much of Polish literature has drowned, to dissolve you. Beforeign forever! Be reluctant, distrustful, sober, sharp, and exotic. Hang in there,boy! Don’t allow yourself to be tamed, domesticated. Your place is not amongthem, but outside of them. You are like a rope, which children call a jump rope: itis thrust ahead so they can jump over it.
Tuesday
Feuilletons. I hear the menacing grumbling of leashed lions from thefeuilletons. I do not know if someone is keeping them at bay or if they themselvesprefer to restrain themselves from jumping, content for the time being with theirdeadly allusions. This past and current year, the émigré press is rife with conspiringpoisons directed at me. I read, for example, in a certain article, about the ‘‘facesmade at the traditional Polish position by certain émigrés, aspiring to the title ofintellectuals.’’ Who are they talking about? Or the item about ‘‘dogmatic icono-clasts and sacristans of suspect initiations.’’ Who could that be? I read further that acertain archmodern drama is very boring and incomprehensible or, too, that X’snovel is a thousand times better than a certain novel aspiring to innovation, whichis muddled and in the worst taste. What play, what novel are they talking about?I don’t wonder. I, in their position, would be equally irritated. Everythingwas functioning normally in our sleepy kingdom of emigration, roles had beenappropriately distributed, the brotherhood was paying homage to itself to every-one’s general satisfaction, when from out of the blue, from out of Argentina, pops aguy who does not belong to the gang. This fellow, who self-proclaims himself awriter and asks none of the columnists’ permission, not only publishes a play andnovel, which break rank and offend people, but also impudently begins publishing154Volume 1a Writer’s Diary, without being acknowledged by the body politic! What’s more,each word of that diary is written against the grain. What a scandal! One has toadmire the phlegmatic nature of these lions. I thought that they would tear mypant cuff to shreds and instead, all I get is a columnist’s barking from the other sideof the fence.If Polish émigré writing were not to a great (great!?) degree a stagnantpond, reﬂecting yesterday’s moon; if it were not mere blather, empty talk, bab-bling; if it were not a mere bovine mastication of yesterday’s food; if you werecapable of something more than a delightful feuilleton, sitting up on its two hindlegs, ingratiating itself to the reader, I would have been engaged in decent andoutright warfare with you long ago. Instead of meandering anonymous pinchesfrom the rear, they would hit me from the front. I would have a real polemic to dealwith, which would not ask how to ridicule and slander the enemy in the eyes of thepublic with insinuations, but which would loyally seek his truth and strike at himwith all the force of inner conviction. Such a polemic, however, exceeds thestrength of the feuilletons. The feuilletons do not aim to get to my truth, only to mya— — —, in order to pinch it. Feuilletons cannot polemicize with me, as their sly andidiotic calculations dictate to pass me over in silence so as not to advertise myexistence. For the feuilletons everything is generally reduced to personal details, tostupid tactics and equally dumb strategy. Feuilletons would have to begin with amore thorough acquaintance with my literature and reﬂection of which they areincapable; they know only allusions, grimaces, jokes, kicks, and other pirouettes.Feuilletons, for the most part, prefer not to examine me seriously, because then itwould turn out that I am no scandal, but only an honest, though perhaps unsuc-cessful (no one is infallible) attempt to renew our thought and adjust to our reality.The feuilletons, however, prefer to let me remain a scandal because this matchestheir demimonde psyche and allows them to make faces.This drowning out of our public life by a feuilleton will end badly. Every-thing will change into a hash, and into an eternal bowing and scraping before thereader. There is no way that in these circumstances something unlike journalismcan be born. It is anecdote, not even the former pompous clichés, that reigns. Weare a group of tourists showering each other with jokes and sayings. In this vacuumof our thoughtlessness, in the pile of blasé, feuilleton nothingness, our eternallyrical Poem has plopped itself down and howls like a soaked dog.1954155Friday
The pugnacious essay ‘‘Against Poets’’ arose from my irritation because formany Warsaw and un-Warsaw years the poets teased me with their insistent andconsistent ‘‘poeticality.’’ I had had enough of it. This is, ﬁrst of all, a reaction to themilieu and its unhappy genre. Yet that anger forced me to vent the whole problemof writing poetry.Why did the battle, which had developed in the press from this article, notintroduce anything worthy of attention?My opponents, if they had actually wanted to understand my position,would have had to conceive of it against the background of the great revision ofvalues that is taking place now in all ﬁelds. What is it based on? On the uncoveringof the backstage of our theater. On the revelation that phenomena are not thatwhich they would like to appear to be. We are reassessing morality, idealism,consciousness, psychism, history. . . . A hunger for reality has been born in us, thewind of doubt has blown, and it is this that has undone our masquerade. . . .Should only art remain a taboo? Shouldn’t art be revised before all else?One more revision, an even more drastic revision? Yet this is an Augean stable!Nothing is as stupid as this: our cohabitation with art.You say that this institution of veriﬁed poetry has functioned for thousandsof years and that everyone adores poetry? This in itself is a good reason to try tobring this adoration under scrutiny. You cite the names of famous poets. Poetsmore famous that they have vanished in the ﬂames of our growing distrust.I would wait in vain for my question to be enriched by those who havesurfaced with the polemic. They knew only how to narrow it to such arguments, forinstance: Gombrowicz claims that no one likes poems, but when I declaimedpoems to the soldiers, I saw on their faces, etc., etc. Or: Tasso’s octaves were recitedfrom memory by simple Tuscan shepherds. When I want to decode the realmeaning of our relations with rhymed poetry, to get beyond the facade, to checkwhat our feelings are and, what is more, how far we can trust them, you give meshepherds and soldiers.It is too bad that a matter that is difﬁcult and profound should appear in theplayground of journalistic polemic (my fault). If I started this, it was to separatemyself from an area that reeks of mystiﬁcation. A revision of rhymed poetry can156Volume 1take place only within the framework of an incomparably more universal revision,encompassing our relation to art and, generally, to reform.Nevertheless, my antipoetic conclusions seem to me to be worthy of exam-ination. You cannot manage this in ﬁve minutes with a few scribbles of a capriciouspen, this is a new thought, one based on authentic experience.
Friday
Another reproach in this polemic drew my attention, namely, the one that©obodowski aims at my ‘‘geniuslike grimacing,’’ which means that I woo ‘‘bril-liance’’ and betray tendencies to megalomania. I assume that this is not the lasttime I will be showered with invectives of this kind—I, and certainly my diary.I agree. The indecency with which I bare my appetites for glory, discovery,even brilliance may be disturbing to a conventional way of seeing things, whichrelies on a tactful modesty. Never fear, O modest ones, I, too, know how to put on ahumble face, no worse than yours, except that it is no longer useful in my relationwith the reader to whom I want to be more real, secured in the real play of forces inliterature.Perhaps there is more modesty in my ‘‘airs and miens’’ which betray ambi-tion than in your tactful concealing of it. . . . On a more general note, whendealing with a conscious man, who knows what he is doing and why, do not resortto such cheap tricks as pinching.
Thursday
From my letter to K. A. Jele ´nski:‘‘Ah, if only I could focus, concentrate, and, above all, tear myself awayfrom readers! This diary is 30% of what it ought to be, it could be pushed into amore absolute sphere; my problems, an entire array of issues, and my becomingbefore the eyes of the public demand greater radicality, a sharper differentiationfrom the normal writing process. Exhausted from working to make a living, how-ever, and writing every month, almost under the title of a feuilleton, being sodirectly tied to the reader and dependent on him—what am I to do? I am scattered.I should reveal myself more and bare myself, but these things cannot be done1954157halfheartedly. I console myself that one day, maybe slowly, gradually, I will be ableto lead the diary into the right areas and I will be able to impose on them with theappropriate acuity that process of kneading and forming of my public being.’’(Written just a little to draw him even more into my affairs, with thecalculation that this program will interest him and that this is the tone that heexpects from me. I have to take care of Jele ´ nski, who understands me, who isworking his way up, whose position in Polish and French letters is delineatingitself. With calculation or without, the above passage contains the truth.)1581955
XIV
Saturday
I ﬁnd out from Tito that Cesar Fernandez Moreno recorded our conversa-tion about Argentina and that he intends to publish it in a certain monthly. I calledhim with the request to show it to me before he prints it.You don’t know anything at all about my coexistence with the Argentineliterary world. Yes, I realize that until now you have not been let in on this chapterof my biography. I don’t doubt that you will listen to this gladly. Have I been able todraw you into myself enough so that everything that concerns me is not indifferentto you?As you know, I arrived in Buenos Aires on the liner Chrobry a week beforethe war broke out.Jeremi Stempowski, at that time the local direct of ‘‘Gal,’’ took me underhis wing and it was he who introduced me to one of the leading writers, ManuelGalvez. Galvez was a friend of Choroma ´ nski, who had spent more than a year herebefore my arrival and had made many friends. Galvez showed me the ﬁnesthospitality and helped me in many ways, but the deafness he suffered pushed himto the sidelines, into isolation, so he passed me on to an equally well-known poet,Artur Capdevila, who was also an ‘‘amigo de Choroma ´ nski.’’ ‘‘Ah,’’ said Mrs. Cap- devila, ‘‘if you are as charming as Choroma ´ nski, you will have no trouble winningour hearts.’’Unfortunately, things went otherwise. I cannot blame the Argentineans.They would have had to have applied a much greater dose of perspicacity than isrequired by the hurried mill of big city socializing to ﬁnd their bearings in mymadness at that time and they would have had to have been angels of patience in1955159order to become accustomed to it. At fault was the ‘‘constellation’’ that arose in mylost sky. . . .When I sailed from Poland to Argentina, I was utterly demoralized. Never(with the exception, perhaps, of the time spent in Paris many years earlier) did I ﬁndmyself in such a state of disarray. Literature? I wasn’t at all interested in it. After thepublication of Ferdydurke, I decided to rest. The birth of that book was a strong jolt: Iknew that it would be a long time before I was capable of mobilizing new contents inmyself. I was also still poisoned with the venoms of that book. Had it wanted to be‘‘young’’ or mature, I really did not know. Had it been a compromising expression ofmy eternal enchantment with young, therefore charming, inferiority, or a strivingtoward a proud but tragic and unprepossessing mature superiority? When on thedeck of the Chrobry, I passed German, French, and English shores, all lands ofEurope, frozen in the fear of the crime yet unborn, in a climate of stiﬂing expecta-tion, seemed to shout: be reckless, you are nothing, you will do nothing, the onlything left to you is drunkenness! I did get drunk in my fashion, that is, not necessarilyon alcohol—but I sailed drunk in an almost complete stupor.Then the boundaries between countries and the tablets of commandmentsshattered, the ﬂoodgates of blind forces opened and—ah! I was suddenly in Argen-tina, completely alone, cut off, lost, ruined, anonymous. I was a little excited, alittle frightened. Yet at the same time, something in me told me to greet withpassionate emotion the blow that was destroying me and upsetting the order I hadknown up to now. War? The destruction of Poland? The fate of those close to me,my family? My own destiny? Could I take this to heart in a way, how shall I say this,in a normal way, I, who knew all this from the beginning, who had already knownthis? Yes, I am not lying when I say that I had been living with catastrophe. When ithappened, I said something to myself like: Ah, so it has ﬁnally happened and Iunderstood the time had come to take advantage of the capacity that I had culti-vated in myself to separate and leave. Nothing had changed. The cosmos, the lifein which I had been imprisoned did not become different because the deﬁnedorder of my existence had come to an end. Yet the shiver of some terrible andfeverish excitement was born of the feeling that violence liberates that unnamedand unformed something whose presence was not foreign to me, an element ofwhich I knew only that it was ‘‘inferior,’’ ‘‘younger,’’ and moving now like a ﬂood inthe black and violent night. I don’t know if I will be speaking lucidly enough when160Volume 1I say that from the ﬁrst, I fell in love with the catastrophe that I hated, that, after all,also ruined me. My nature told me to greet it as an opportunity to join withinferiority in darkness.Capdevila, poet, university professor, editor of the great daily La Prensa,lived with his family in a beautiful villa in Palermo and the breeze ﬂuttering fromthat house smelled of Kurier Warszawski and Lourse’s café. I remember the ﬁrsttime I went there for supper. How was I supposed to present myself to the Capde-vilas? As a tragic exile from a country overrun by the enemy? As a foreign literarypersonage discussing the ‘‘new values’’ in art, informing himself about the countryin which he was staying? Capdevila was full of expectations, Mrs. Capdevila wasfull of expectations that I would appear to them in one of these guises and, ofcourse, they were full of a potential goodwill for the ‘‘amigo de Choroma ´ nski.’’ They were soon confounded to see before them a rather young man, who was nolonger such a young man. . . .What happened? Yes. I have to confess this: under the inﬂuence of the war,the strengthening of the ‘‘inferior’’ and regressive powers, an eruption of some sortof belated youth took place in me. I ﬂed to youth in the face of defeat and slammedthe door. I had always had the inclination to seek in youth, that is, in my youth andthat of others, a haven from ‘‘values,’’ that is, from culture. I have already written inthis diary: youth is a value in itself, that is, a destroyer of all other values, which arenot necessary to it because it is self-sufﬁcient. I, therefore, in the face of thedestruction of everything I had possessed up to now—homeland, home, social andartistic position—took refuge in youth and with all the greater urgency because Iwas ‘‘in love.’’ Entre nous soit dit, the war made me younger . . . and two factorsaided me in this. I looked young, I had the fresh face of a man in his twenties. Theworld treated me like a young man—for the overwhelming majority of the fewPoles who read me, I was a crazy upstart, an altogether frivolous person—and forthe Argentineans, I was someone completely unknown, something of a debutantfrom the provinces who must ﬁrst prove himself and win recognition. Even if I hadwanted to impose myself on these people as a value and as seriousness, what couldI have done, since their language was unknown to me and we communicated withone another in a rather lame French. Therefore, everything, my appearance andmy situation, and that complete ejection from culture and the secret vibrations of1955161my soul, everything pushed me into the recklessness of a young man, into a youngself-sufﬁciency.The Capdevilas had a daughter, Chinchina, twenty years old. It just sohappened that, after a while, he and his wife passed me on to Chinchina and she,in turn, introduced me to all of her friends. And imagine Gombrowicz in thatmortal year 1940, casually ﬂirting with those girls, who showed him the museums,took him out for pastries and for whom I gave a talk about European love . . . a largetable in the Capdevilas dining room, twelve women and myself at the table—whatan idyll!—speaking about l’amour européen. However much this scene seems to bea shameful contrast with those scenes over there, basically it was not so far removedfrom that. It was merely a different form of the same defeat, the beginning of a roadthat also led to the bottom. A kind of complete trivialization of my being tookplace. I became light and empty.At the same time, I was sinking into Argentina, distant from all that, exoticand forgiving, indifferent and given up to its own everydayness. How did I come toknow Roger Pla? Probably through Miss Galignana Segura. It is enough to say thathe got me into the house of Antoni Berni, a painter, and there, too, I gave a talkabout Europe to a group of painters and literati. Everything I said was very bad,however, yes, exactly at the moment when it was important to gain a certain amountof recognition, my style deceived me and my words became so feeble that it wasalmost compromising. What did I talk about? About the regression of Europe, abouthow and why Europe suddenly desired savagery and in what way this pathologicaltendency of the European spirit can be exploited to revise culture that is torn awayfrom its base. In saying this, I myself was probably a sad specimen of regression andalso its shameful illustration. It was as if, as if the words were betraying me andwanted to prove that I was not on the level of those issues, that I was beneath what Iwas discussing. To this day I remember how on the Diagonal Norte, Pla accused meof harboring stupid and naive sentimentality in my reasoning. I, on the other hand,acknowledging inwardly that he was right, and even suffering along with him, knewthat this was inevitable. There are periods in which our personality is divided andone-half of our being trips up on the other half, as if it had chosen a different pathand a different goal. There, at Berni’s, I made the acquaintance of Cecilia Beneditde Debenedetti, in whose home on avenida Alvear a motley crowd of bohemians162Volume 1gathered. Cecilia lived in a kind of stupor, amazed, terriﬁed, stunned by life,surrounded on all sides, waking up only to fall into another and more fantasticdream, ﬁghting, Chaplin style, with the issue of existence. She was incapable ofbearing the fact that she existed, a woman of marvelous attributes, outstandingvirtues, a noble and aristocratic soul. Because she was devastated and terriﬁed by thevery fact of existence, it was all the same to her who surrounded her. Parties atCecilia’s? Some of it remains in my memory, the dancing Joaquin Perez Fernandez,Rivas Rooney, dead drunk, some very young girl, very pretty and partying intounconsciousness . . . yes, yes, and those parties merge with many others in otherplaces and I see myself, shot glass in hand, and I hear my own voice, coming to mefrom afar, blended with the voice of Juliet.I: See those two young girls there in the corner? Do you know them?Juliet: Those are the daughters of the woman who is talking to La Fleur. I willtell you what they say about her: she took two boys off the street to a hotel and shotthem up to excite them . . . but one had a weak heart and died. Can you imagine? Aninvestigation, police . . . but she has connections, the whole affair was covered up, sheleft town and spent a year in Montevideo.I couldn’t let on how important this news was to me and said only:Well, you don’t say!Shortly thereafter I left the gathering and set out through the navy blue,still Argentine night and made my way to the Retiro, which you already know fromTrans-Atlantic: ‘‘And there the hill sloped toward the river and the city steps downto the port and a light breeze from quiet waters winds like a song through the tree-lined square. There were many sailors there. . . .’’ To persons who may be interestedI would like to explain that never, with the exception of sporadic incidents at a veryearly age, was I a homosexual. I do not know, perhaps, quite how to deal withwomen, I do not know how to deal with them in the realm of feelings, as thereexists in me a certain obstacle to sentiment, as if I were afraid of feeling . . . yetwoman, especially a certain type of woman, attracts and rivets me. I was not,therefore, seeking erotic adventures in the Retiro, but—bewildered, divorced frommyself, disinherited and derailed, fed by blind passions kindled in me by mycrashing world and bankrupt fate—what was I looking for? Youth. I could say that Iwas looking for both my own and somebody else’s youth. Someone else’s becausethe youth in a naval or soldier’s uniform, the youth of those archcommon boys1955163from the Retiro, was inaccessible, their sex, the lack of sexual attraction, excludedall possibility of joining and possessing. My own because it was also mine, it cameto life in someone like me, not in a woman, but in a man, this was the same youththat had cast me off, now blossoming in someone else. For a man, youth, beauty,and grace in a woman will never be as ﬁnal as their expression because a woman isstill something else and she creates the possibility of that which to a certainbiological extent rescues us: a child. Here in the Retiro, I saw youth in itself, so tospeak, youth independent of sex and I experienced the blossoming of the humanform in its sharpest and most extremely—because it was marked by hopelessness—demonic form. What’s more, down, down, down! This pulled me down, to thelowest stratum, into the land of degradation. Here, youth, already degraded asyouth, was subjected to a second degradation, as rural youth, proletarian youth.And I, Ferdydurke, repeated the third section of my book, the story of Mientus whotries to fraternize with the stable boy.Yes, yes! This is where I was led by a set of tendencies to which I submitted,while in my former homeland degradation was reaching absolute bottom and onlya pushing upward remained. This was my new homeland, which slowly came toreplace the other. How often I left the artistic or social gatherings to wander theRetiro, on Leandro Alem, to drink beer and, with the greatest absorption, garnerthe glances of the Goddess, the secret of blossoming and degraded life. In mymemory, all those days of my being in Buenos Aires were lined with nights at theRetiro. Nevertheless this blind and deaf obsession was beginning to dominate meutterly and even though my mind still worked, I realized that I had gotten boggeddown somewhere on a dangerous periphery. Naturally, the ﬁrst thing that came tomy mind was that I was paving the way for subconscious homosexual tendencies.Perhaps I would have greeted this fact with satisfaction, as it would have placed mein a speciﬁc reality, but no, at the same time, I established close ties with a woman,whose intensity left nothing to be desired. During this period I generally spent a lotof time chasing girls, in even a pretty scandalous manner. Please forgive theseconfessions. I do not intend to give you a tour of my erotic life, it is simply a matterof delineating the limits of my experience. If at the start, I took refuge in youthfrom values inaccessible to me, then shortly thereafter it appeared to me as theonly, highest, and absolute value of life and its sole beauty. That ‘‘value,’’ however,had one characteristic, probably devised by the devil himself, that, being youth, it164Volume 1was always something beneath value, it was intimately connected with degrada-tion, it was degradation itself.It was probably in 1942 that I became friends with Karol Mastronardi: thiswas my ﬁrst intellectual friendship in Argentina. The few poems Mastronardi hadwritten had assured him a signiﬁcant place in Argentine art. A little over forty,subtle, bespectacled, ironic, sarcastic, hermetic, perhaps a little like Lecho ´ n, thispoet from Entre Ríos was the provinces, adorned with the most Parisian European-ism. He was angelic goodness garbed in the armor of causticity, a mollusk, protect-ing his oversensitivity. He was curious about the rare, at that time, example of acultured European in Argentina and we frequently met at a bar late at night whichalso had the gastronomic signiﬁcance of his occasionally treating me to ravioli orspaghetti. Gradually I revealed my literary past to him. I told him about Ferdydurke and other matters and all that was Slavic in me and different from the French,Spanish, and English art that he knew interested him profoundly. He, in turn,introduced me to backstage Argentina, a difﬁcult and elusive country to intellec-tuals, and even terrifying to them in many ways. Yet the game was much moremasked on my part, because it was forbidden. I could not say everything. I couldnot reveal that place in me, smelling of night, which I called ‘‘Retiro.’’ I offeredMastronardi the work of my derailed brain, which sought ‘‘solutions,’’ withoutmentioning the sources of my inspiration. He did not know where this passioncame from in me, with which I struck at all ‘‘old age,’’ and with which I demandedthat this current surging from below be made manifest in culture (which is basedon the supremacy of superiority, the older old age, maturity), this current which, inturn, makes old age dependent on youth, superiority dependent on inferiority. Idemanded that ‘‘the adult be subordinated to the Younger.’’ I demanded that thisstriving for our relentless rejuvenation ﬁnally be legalized and that youth be recog-nized as a separate and authentic value, which changes our relation to othervalues. I had to impose the semblance of reasoning onto that which was my passionin reality and this led me into the fathomless constructs, which were really a matterof indifference to me . . . but isn’t this the way thought is born: as an indifferentsurrogate of blind strivings, needs, passions, for which we are unable to establishthe right to exist among people. The exonerating factor in this dialogue was child-hood, because Mastronardi, who was almost as childish as I was, luckily knew howto play with me, just as I played with him. Childhood, being something that is1955165related to youth, is however inﬁnitely less drastic; that is why it is easier for a matureman to be childish rather than youthful; that is why I almost always becamechildish in the face of the demon of verdure whom I could not handle. However,as much as I wanted to be childish, how much was I really childish? How muchdid I want to be young and how much was I really some sort of belated youth?How much was this mine and how much was it something of which I was en-amored? Mastronardi was on intimate terms with Victoria Ocampo’s group, themost serious literary center in the country, concentrated around the monthly Sur,published by the same Victoria, an older and aristocratic lady—sitting on thickmillions—whose enthusiastic stubbornness resulted in her becoming a friend ofPaul Valéry; receiving Tagore and Keyserling in her home; having tea at BernardShaw’s and being a buddy of Stravinsky. How far Mrs. Ocampo’s millions weighedin these majestic intimacies and how much her personal attributes and talents, is aquestion that I will not attempt to answer. The relentless smell of those millions,the strong ﬁnancial perfume of Mrs. Ocampo, prevented me from making heracquaintance, too. People said that one well-known French writer fell on his kneesbefore her, crying out that he would not get up until he received twenty or thirtythousand to start a literary revue. He got the money because, as Ocampo said later,what was I supposed to do with a man who knelt and wouldn’t get up?! I had to givehim the money! As for me, that French writer’s approach to Mrs. Ocampo seemedto me to be the healthiest and most sincere of the lot, but I knew from thebeginning that, not being known in Paris, I couldn’t extract a thing from her, evenif I were to kneel there for months. I was, therefore, in no rush to go on thepilgrimage to the residence in San Isidro. Mastronardi, rightly fearing that el conde(for, as I have already mentioned earlier, I announced myself a count) was ready toact strangely and even incomprehensibly, also put off introducing my person tothese gatherings. He decided to acquaint me ﬁrst with Victoria’s sister, Sylvina,married to Adolf Bioy Casares. One evening we went there for supper.Later on I came to know many literati and a substantial percentage ofArgentine literature, but I will dwell a little longer on these ﬁrst steps of mine, asthose that followed were not much different. Sylvina was a ‘‘poetess,’’ and pub-lished a volume every so often. Her husband, Adolfo, was the author of pretty goodscience ﬁction novels. This cultured husband and wife spent all day in poetry, inprose, attending exhibits and concerts, studying French novelties, and ﬁlling the166Volume 1gaps in their collection of records. This supper, however, was also attended byBorges, probably the most talented Argentine writer, with an intelligence hewn onhis own personal suffering. I, on the other hand, justly or unjustly, considered myintelligence to be my passport, something that assures my simplisms the right toexist in the civilized world. Bypassing technical difﬁculties, my unruly Spanish andBorges’s faulty pronunciation—he spoke quickly and incomprehensibly—bypass-ing my impatience, pride, and anger, which were the consequence of a painfulegotism and restrictions in foreignness, what was the possibility of understandingbetween me and that intellectual, aesthetic, and philosophical Argentina? I wasfascinated by the lower stratum in that country and this was the upper crust. I wasenthralled by the darkness of the Retiro, they, by the lights of Paris. For me, thatunconfessed, silent youth of the country was a vibrating conﬁrmation of my ownemotional states and thanks to them the country swept me up like a melody or likethe herald of a melody. They saw no beauty in this. For me, if there was somethingin Argentina that attained the fullness of its expression and could appeal as art,style, form, this something appeared only in the early phases of development, inthe young people, never in the adults. What is it that is important in a youngperson? Not his reason, nor experience, knowledge, technique, which are alwaysworse and weaker than in an established and consolidated man, but exactly andexclusively his youth. This is his only trump card. Yet they saw nothing positive inthis and that Argentine elite remained one rather of docile and diligent youngpeople, whose ambition was to learn as quickly as possible from their elders. Ahyes, to equal France and England! Ah yes, to grow up, to grow up quickly! And howcould they be young, if personally, of course, these were already people of a certainage and their personal status clashed with that general youth of their country, theirbelonging to a higher social class excluded a real fusing with the lower stratum.Therefore, Borges, for example, was someone who took into consideration only hisown age, tearing himself completely from his base, this was a mature man, anintellectual and artist, who was accidentally born in Argentina, though he couldhave just as easily been born in Montparnasse.Yet the atmosphere of the country was such that in it this international,sophisticated Borges (for, if he was an Argentinean, it was in a European way) couldnot capture the undertone. He was something extraneous, pasted on, he was anornament. It would have been almost nonsensical to demand that he, being older,1955167should express youth directly, that he, being superior, should literally express in-feriority. Yet I held it against them that they could not work out their own relation-ship to culture, in harmony with their reality, with the reality of Argentina. Even iffrom a personal vantage point some of them were mature, they still lived in acountry where maturity was weaker than immaturity and here, in Argentina, art,religion, and philosophy were not the same as in Europe. Instead of transplantingthem here live onto this soil and then moaning that the tree is rachitic—would it nothave been better to raise something more in harmony with the nature of their land?The docility of Argentine art, its correctness, its mien of a good student, itsbehavior, were, for me, a testimony of impotence regarding its own destiny. Iwould prefer a creative gaffe, a mistake, even sloppiness, anything that was alivewith energy, intoxicated with the poetry which the country breathed and whichthey passed with their noses stuck in a book. Sometimes, I tried to tell this or thatArgentinean the same thing that I often told the Poles: Interrupt your poem writingfor a minute, your picture painting, your conversation about surrealism, considerﬁrst of all if this does not bore you, consider whether this is really so important toyou, think about whether you would not be more authentic, free and creative, byignoring the gods to whom you pray. Interrupt this for a minute in order to reﬂecton your place in the world and culture and the choice of your media and goals. Butno. In spite of all their intelligence they did not understand in the least what I wastalking about. Nothing could stop the ﬂow of cultural production. Exhibits. Con-certs. Lectures about Alfonsin Storni or Leopoldo Lugones. Commentary, classes,and studies. Novels and short stories. Volumes of poetry. And wasn’t I, after all, aPole and didn’t they know that Poles are not, generally, ﬁnos, and generally not onthe level of Parisian issues? Therefore they decided that I am an adequately mud-dled secondhand anarchist of the kind that, lacking deeper consciousness, pro-claim élan vital and despise that which they cannot understand.This is how the supper at the Bioy Casareses’ ended: nowhere. Like allsuppers consumed by me with Argentine literature. And this is how time passed . . .the night of Europe and my night passed, in the course of which my mythologywas growing with terrible pains. Today I could present a whole list of words,things, persons, places which have the taste of a heavy, intimate holiness for me.This was my fate, my tabernacle. If I were to lead you into this cathedral, youwould be amazed to see how unimportant, how outright impoverished, worthy of168Volume 1condescension and actually silly in their petty everydayness were these sacra that Iworshiped. Holiness, however, is not measured by the greatness of the deity but bythe tenacity of the soul, which makes anything at all holy. ‘‘One cannot ﬁght thatwhich the soul chooses.’’ Toward the end of 1943 I caught a cold and a slight feverremained which did not want to subside. I played chess then in the Café Rex onCorrientes, and Frydman, the director of the chess hall, a noble and good friend,became worried about my state of health and got together a little money to sendme into the Córdoban mountains—a trip that I took with pleasure—yet even therethe fever did not want to subside until ﬁnally, bam, the thermometer that had beenborrowed from Frydman shattered. I bought a new one and the fever vanished.This was how I came to owe a stay of a few months in La Falda to Frydman’s brokenthermometer which registered a few degrees too many. The stay was spiced by thefact that in the neighboring Valle Hermoso lived a certain acquaintance, an Argen-tine woman, whom I came to know through Cleo, the sister of the dancer RositaContreras.Staying in La Falda, I did not suspect that terrible and silly experienceswere awaiting me.Everything was falling into place. Liberated from ﬁnancial difﬁculties, Itook up residence at the hotel San Martin and shortly thereafter became ac-quainted with a pair of charming twins (I have already written about these two);with them and other young people we took walks and I made new friends in whoma nascent life quivered, like a hummingbird, on whom fell a smile, this smile beingone of the most noble phenomena that I know, as it happens in spite of everything,in spite of, ﬁrst of all, an immeasurable sadness, the crushing nostalgia and regretof those years, condemned to insatiety. You know the carefree vacations in themountains or at the seaside. Your hat is stolen by the wind, a sandwich is eaten on aboulder, you get drenched in the rain. My understanding with Latin America,being the renewal of the fabulous European races, amazingly quiet and discreet inits now polite being, seemed to me spoiled by nothing (at the same time, mybrother and nephew were in a concentration camp; my mother and sister—havingescaped bombed-out Warsaw—were wandering in the countryside; and the roar ofhorror and agony was ringing out over the Rhine. I did not forget this, it magniﬁedmy silence). You don’t have to imagine that in spending time with these boys, Iacted as if I were one of them; why, my sense of the ridiculous would never have1955169allowed me to do that. I acted like the older, despising them, sneering at them,teasing them, exploiting all the advantages of an adult. And this was exactly whatfascinated them and healed their youthfulness. At the same time, outside of thistyranny, a secret understanding was established, based on our mutual need. Never-theless, one day, having looked carefully in the mirror, I saw something new on myface: a subtle net of wrinkles, appearing on my forehead and under my eyes and inthe corners of my mouth, just as under the inﬂuence of chemicals a seeminglyinnocent letter reveals its ominous contents. My accursed face! My face betrayedme, betrayal, betrayal!Was it the dryness of the air? Or the lime in the water? Or had the inevitablemoment simply arrived, in which my age shot through the lies of my youthfulcomplexion? Ridiculed, humbled by the quality of this suffering, I understood,peering at my own face, that this was the end, the limit, ﬁnale, point and end point!On the roads leading from La Falda there is a line along which the lights of thehouses and hotels end and the darkness of space begins, broken into hills andovergrown with gnarled trees, gnarled space, broken, like a cripple and marred. Icalled this line the ‘‘shadow line’’ after Conrad and when I crossed it at night, on myway to Valle Hermoso, I knew that I was entering death, oh, an insigniﬁcant,delicate, and slow death, if you wish, but I was entering dying . . . that I myself wasthe aging process and a live death, which was pretending to be alive, which stillwalks, talks, even has fun, a great time, but is really alive only as a gradual realizationof death. Just as Adam had been expelled from Paradise, so I sank into the darkness,beyond the shadow line, deprived of life, which there, beyond me, delighted in itselfin rays of grace. Yes, the mystiﬁcation had to expose itself, one day this illegal andbelated excursion into blossoming life had to be interrupted and now, lo andbehold, I am the aging process, I, poisoned, I, repulsive, I—an adult! And this ﬁlledme with a terrible fear because I understood that I was ﬁnally thrown out of thecharmed circle and that I could not appeal to nature, yes, if youth is less afraid of life,it is because it itself is an attractive life: disarming, charming and it knows that it isappealing and can count on kindness. This, therefore, was the reason that I was soattracted to the blossoming, but now, on this suddenly dry earth under a vault ofmerciless stars, I had to withstand the pressure of existing, myself a ﬂawed beingincapable of winning anything over, so unattractive!170Volume 1And here we can see what a liberation sex is, that division into women andmen. For when at the height of my way of the cross, I reached that familiar villawhere my mistress awaited me, the entire panorama of my fate changed and thiswas like the incursion of another new power, of an alien power which turned myentire ‘‘constellation’’ upside down! Youth awaited me there but a different kind ofyouth, embodied in a human shape, but different from mine. Those shoulders, atonce the same but exotic, also made me someone else, forced me in those em-braces to harmonize with the foreignness as its completion. Femininity did notdemand youth from me, merely masculinity and I became only a man, possessive,capable of possessing, annexing someone else’s biology, the monstrousness ofmasculinity, which does not take into account its own ugliness, does not care aboutbeing appealing, being an act of expansion and violence and, above all, of domi-nance, dominance seeking only its own satisfaction. It could be this brought metemporary relief. It was as if I had stopped being a human being, fearful, threat-ened, and became a lord, possessor, sovereign . . . and she, a woman, was killing theboy with the man. But this did not last long.It lasted as long as Being divided itself by force of sex into two poles. When Ireturned home toward morning in the cool, predawn hours, everything closed inaround me. There was no escape: I felt like a cheat or like someone who fell victimto cheating, and the consciousness of dying tore into me again. I was alreadysupplied with a negative sign. I was in opposition to life. A woman was incapable ofrescuing me, a woman could save me only as a man, but I was also simply a livingbeing, nothing else. Again the desire for ‘‘my’’ youth returned, that is, for the kindlike myself, for the kind that was now repeating itself in others, younger than I.This, therefore, was for me the only corner of life where a blossoming was takingplace, my blossoming, that is, something absolutely charming and enchantingwhich I completely lacked. All else was degradation, compensation. This was theonly triumph, the only joy in a monstrous, bedraggled, weary, despairing, anddebased humanity. I found myself amid monsters, I myself a monster. Looking atthe houses, cast into the valley, full of any old kind of boys, sleeping a banal sleep, Ithought that my homeland had moved to them.I returned to Buenos Aires convinced that nothing was left to me, nothingat least that would not be a surrogate. I rode with my humiliating secret, which Iwas ashamed to conﬁde in anyone, as it was unmanly and I, a man, was, after all,1955171subjected to men and the loud and ribald laugh of those gruff males threatened mefor having broken rank with their possessive codes. In Rosario the train was overrunby twenty-year-old sailors returning to their base in Buenos Aires.This is enough for now, my hand hurts from writing, but this is not the lastof my recollections from those not-so-remote years in Argentina.
XV
Sunday
I want to ﬁnish talking about my Argentine past.You are already familiar with the spiritual state in which I returned toBuenos Aires from La Falda.At that time I was a thousand miles from literature. Art? Writing? All of itremained boarded up, dead on that continent and I, Witold, yes, it is true some-times I presented myself as escritor polaco, nevertheless. I was already just one ofthe many disinherited deprived of even a longing for the past that the pampa wasreceiving. I had broken with Poland and I knew that in agricultural Argentinaliterature could assure me neither social position nor material well-being. So whydid I stick with it? In the second half of 1946 (as time passed) having found myselfwith completely empty pockets for the umpteenth time and not knowing where toextract a little money, I had the following idea: I asked Cecilia Debenedetti toﬁnance a translation of Ferdydurke into Spanish and I ﬁgured we would need aboutsix months to do the job. Cecilia readily agreed. I set to work, which looked asfollows: ﬁrst I translated as much as I could from the Polish and then I took themanuscript to the Café Rex, where my Argentine friends worked over the text lineby line, searching for the right words, grappling with the syntax, with the neolo-gisms, with the spirit of the language. I began this hard work without enthusiasm inorder to survive during the following few months and they, these American help-ers, approached the job with resignation, that is, it was a matter of doing a ganch-ada for a victim of the war. When we translated the ﬁrst few pages, however, Ferdy- durke, a book that had been lying in front of me indifferently, dead, suddenly beganto show signs of life as a thing. I noticed a growing interest on the faces of thetranslators, ah, you see, now they are boring into the text with a distinct curiosity!172Volume 1Shortly thereafter the translation began to draw people. At some of the sessions atthe Café Rex, there would be over a dozen people. The man who took the matterto heart as his own, however, and whom I made the chairman of the ‘‘committee’’(made up of a few literati), the man who worked on the ﬁnal version, was VirgilioPiñera, a very talented Cuban. He was the ﬁrst and then a Humberto RodriguezTomeu. Both men were from Cuba, both were Europeans in spirit who werelocked in a ﬁerce, desperate battle with the America that surrounded them andwith the America in themselves. They and the Argentine poet Adolfo de Obietawere the ones most responsible for bringing this difﬁcult and, as critics laterclaimed, quite remarkable translation to a conclusion.As for me, I had not read Ferdydurke in seven years. I had crossed it out ofmy life. Now I read it again, line after line, and its words meant nothing to me. Thenothingness of words. The nothingness of ideas, problems, styles, attitudes, thenothingness of art. Words, words, words. All of this solved nothing in me, thisentire effort only sunk me deeper into my greenness. Why had I taken this imma-turity by the horns? So that it could toss me around? In Ferdydurke, two loves ﬁghtwith each other, two strivings: the striving for maturity and the striving for eternallyrejuvenating immaturity. This book is the image of the battle for the maturity ofsomeone who is in love with his own immaturity. It was clear that I had not beensuccessful in winning over this love, nor had I civilized it, and being wild, illegal,secret, it wreaked havoc in me as something secret and forbidden. So why had Iwritten that book? And the ridiculous impotence of words in the face of life!Nevertheless! A text that was so unimportant to me appeared very effectiveoutside of me, in the external world, and lines that were dead for me came to life inothers and how else could I explain to myself that suddenly the book becamesomething valuable and personally close to some of those young people and notonly as art but also as a revolt, revision, and battle. From them I was able todetermine that I had touched certain cultural nerve centers and, at the same time,I saw how this enthusiasm, which would not have been very long lasting in each ofthem individually, began to consolidate itself ‘‘between them,’’ by virtue of the factthat one aroused the other and conﬁrmed him in his enthusiasm. Yet if this is whatwas going on with this handful, why wouldn’t it repeat itself with others, whenFerdydurke was published? So the book could count on the same response here,abroad, as in Poland—or even better. It was, therefore, universal. It was probably1955173one of the few, one of the very very few of our books genuinely capable of movingstrangers, readers, of the best class. And in Paris? I realized that Ferdydurke’s worldcareer was not something from the realm of dreams (which I had known earlier,but had forgotten).However, my nature, bound to inferiority, stopped dead in its tracks at themere possibility of becoming superior and that repeated foray of literature into mylife could turn out to be—this is what I was afraid of—the ﬁnal liquidation of theRetiro. I will tell you something characteristic: when Ferdydurke was published, Itook it to ‘‘where the tower stands that was built by the English’’ and showed it tothe Retiro—in farewell, as a sign of a ﬁnal breaking of relations. A ﬁery regret andfear. What an illusion! I didn’t value the sleepy immobility of America enough . . .its juices, which dissolve everything. Ferdydurke drowned in this immobility, noreviews in the press or efforts of its advocates helped, this was, after all, the book of aforeigner, and nota bene, one unrecognized in Paris, yes, exactly, unrecognized inParis. . . . It appealed neither to the group of Argentine intelligentsia under the signof Marx and the proletariat, which demanded a political literature, nor to that onewhich nourished itself on the cultural specialties of European cuisine. The bookwas also furnished with an introduction by me, where I express myself aboutArgentina and Polish writing, without paying much homage to either. I ﬁnishedthe introduction with an appeal not to put me in the painful position of offeringthe courteous phrases usually offered in such cases. Because up to now the socialrole of art has been understood falsely and, as a consequence, you do not know howto treat the artists appropriately or know how to talk to them, I wrote, don’t sayanything to me. Save yourselves and me the embarrassment. If you want to let meknow that the work appealed to you, touch your right ear; touching your left earwill mean a negative opinion; and touching the nose, a moderate opinion. Thuslightly, even carelessly, did I introduce Ferdydurke into the Argentine world, forthis monstrous debut left me even more uncompromising toward the reader andhis indulgence or lack of it.I consider it a relative success that in these circumstances the edition waspractically sold out and that my publisher did not lose money and was even able topay me a little. After all, the average Argentine reader was not at all bad, on thecontrary, he was capable of assimilating, and how much less hereditarily burdenedand freer of complexes than Poles. Yet in a milieu in which no one trusted anyone174Volume 1else (that disaster of secondary cultural milieus), where there were no people ableto impose a value, Ferdydurke could not gain any authority. For difﬁcult books thatdemand effort, authority is absolutely needed simply in order to force people toread. This way or that, once again I was drawn into the workings of literature. Ibegan to outline the drama The Marriage quite clearly, and, I would say, shame-lessly setting out for brilliance, aiming for a peak on the scale of Hamlet or Faust, awork in which I could express not only the pains of the epoch, but the new humansensibility that was being born. . . . How easy greatness and brilliance seemed tome, at least easier than correctness, which even a fairly good text demands. Thisdid not result from some naïveté of mine but for the reason that greatness andbrilliance together with all the other values were destroyed for me by the onlydemon that was really important to me, by that great destroyer of values, youth. Ifelt no respect for them because I was not especially dependent on them and, so, Icould use them freely. It is not difﬁcult to walk a plank up ten stories if onehas stopped being afraid of heights—you walk it as if it lay on the ground. (Butyou cannot reproach The Marriage with this—it, a least, does not conceal this‘‘easiness’’).It is enough that with the end of the European explosion that released theunderground ferment, even I began to civilize myself. Yet, while my ﬁrst debut, inPoland, was forced by pressure from inside out, the second, in Argentina, came tobe because of pressure from external forces. In Poland I wrote from an innerneed—here, now, I submitted myself to the existing order of things, which con-demned me to literature. I continued myself from years ago. A tiny difference, yetone with an unfathomable and tragic signiﬁcance, heralding that I had reallyceased to exist and that I had spun out of orbit—I existed only as a consequence ofthat which I had done to myself earlier. I maintained a sense of humor, but ﬁrst ofall, I maintained the appearances of an absolving childhood. Literary work beganto draw me into the dialectic of my reality and once again the question arose: whatshould I do in literature with my compromising ties to youth, with inferiority, towhat degree could this lend itself to revelation? Was this only a complex, an illness,deviation, clinical case—or something that has the right to exist among normalhuman beings? The second question was: was I breaking down doors that werealready open, or was this a difﬁcult foray—as timid as a virgin—into wild terrain? Inother words, did this lend itself to use in art?1955175Psychoanalysis! Diagnoses! Formulas! As if I had bitten the hand of apsychiatrist, who suddenly had the desire to scoop out my inner life. It’s not thatthe artist should not have complexes, but that he be able to transform his complexinto a cultural value. The artist, according to Freud, is a neurotic who treatshimself, I guess because no one else can. Yet as if to spite me, in the instance of thathidden directorship, which I am not alone in discovering in life, I was shown animage of clinical hysteria through the wall around my feelings, as practically awarning: watch out, you are a step away from it! In other words, through theintervention of my friends from the ballet troupe, which came to Argentina forguest appearances, I entered a milieu of extreme, wild homosexuality. I say ‘‘ex-treme’’ because I had been rubbing up against ‘‘normal’’ homosexuality for a longtime, the ‘‘artistic’’ world of any latitude is full of that kind of love—but here its face,frenetic to the point of madness, showed itself to me. I broach this subject reluc-tantly. Much time will pass before it will be possible to talk, let along write aboutthis. There is no other area that is so distorted and muddled with passion. Here noone desires to be or can be objective. De gustibus . . . The fury of ‘‘manly’’ men,contorted with revulsion—maniﬁed, mutually nurturing and strengthening themasculinity in themselves—the curses of morality, all the ironies, sarcasms, andangers of culture, guarding the primacy of womanly charm—fall on the ephebesneaking along the border of our ofﬁcial existence. And this thing takes on venomat the higher rungs of development. There, beneath, there, below, this is notunderstood as tragically, or as sarcastically, and the healthiest and most ordinaryboys from the lower classes sometimes give themselves up to this for lack ofwomen—and this, as it turns out, does not distort them at all and does not interferelater with the most conventional marriage.However, the crowd that I had now met was made up of men in love with aman more than any kind of woman, they were putos at the boiling point, notknowing a moment’s rest, in constant pursuit, ‘‘torn to pieces by boys as by dogs,’’just like my Gonzalo in Trans-Atlantic. I took my meals in a restaurant that was oneof their main hangouts and every evening I immersed myself in the dregs of theirmadness, their solemn ritual, their enamored and tormented conspiracy, theirblack magic. There were ﬁrst-rate people among them, with wonderful spiritualattributes that I observed with horror, seeing in the black surface of these passion-ate lakes the reﬂection of my own concerns. I asked myself once again: am I not, in176Volume 1spite of everything, one of them? Wouldn’t it be possible, bah even likely, that I wasa madman like them, in which some sort of internal complication extinguishedphysical attraction? I had already come to know the power of the skepticism withwhich they accepted all ‘‘evasions,’’ everything that, in their opinion, was a cow-ardly beautiﬁcation of brutal truth. Yet—no. Why should my amorous attraction toyoung life, to what was unjaded, to that freshness, be unhealthy? My love ofblossoming life, that is, the only life that deserves the name, as there is no phase inbetween: that which does not blossom, withers. Was it not the object of the con-cealed envy and no less secret adoration of all who, like me, were condemned to aslow dying, deprived of the grace of a daily augmentation of vitality. Was thatboundary between entering and exiting life not the most essential of all? The onlydifference that came between me and ‘‘normal’’ men was that I adored the bril-liance of this goddess—youth—not only in a girl but in a young man and he was aneven more perfect embodiment than she was. . . . Yes, the sin, if it existed, boileddown to the fact that I dared to admire youth irrespective of its sex and I took it outfrom under the domain of Eros. On the pedestal where they had placed a youngwoman, I dared to put a boy. Here, there, it became clear that they, men, agree toadore youth only insofar as it is accessible to them, only insofar as they can possessit so that a youth contained in their own shape, youth with which they could notjoin, was, in some incomprehensible way, hostile.Hostile? Watch out (I said to myself ) that you don’t fall into sentimentalidiocy, into wishful thinking . . . why, I could see manifestations of kindliness, andeven tenderness, of the Older for the Younger all the time. But! But! At the sametime certain facts were evident which meant just the opposite: cruelty. This biolog-ical aristocracy, this ﬂower of humanity was almost always terrifyingly hungry—looking through the windows of restaurants at their elders who could eat their ﬁlland amuse themselves until they dropped—while it was thrust into darkness byunsatisﬁed instincts, tormented by insatiable beauty—a ﬂower trampled and castaside, a degraded ﬂower. The ﬂower of maturing youth, drilled by ofﬁcers and sentto death by the same, those wars being the wars of boys, wars of minors, aboveanything else . . . their training in blind discipline so that they knew how to bleedwhen the need arose. The entire terrible social, economic, intellectual advantageof the Adult manifesting itself with a cruel ruthlessness and accepted by those whosubmitted themselves. It was as if a boy’s hunger, his death and pain had by1955177deﬁnition less weight than the death, pain, and hunger of the Adults, as if a puppyinsigniﬁcance colored their sufferings. And it was exactly this unimportance, thispuppy ‘‘inferiority’’ that made youth a slave, used for services that were somewhatbeneath humanity which was already consolidated. I understood that this washappening almost by itself, simply because with the passing of years the weight andthe meaning of a person increase in society but wasn’t there also the suspicion thatperhaps the Adult was repressing the Younger so that he would not fall to his kneesbefore him? Was not the suffocating vapor of shame arising from this and similarquestions sufﬁcient proof that something was being left unconfessed here and thatnot everything could be explained by the ordinary play of social forces? And wasnot this enormous wave of forbidden and shameful love, that really did cast a manon his knees before a boy, nature’s revenge for the violence wrought on the Matur-ing by the Aged?The vagueness of these questions, their ambiguousness and even theirarbitrariness, did not deprive them of meaning in my eyes, as if I had known fromthe beginning that there must be some truth to this. But the question became allthe more troubling when I began to reﬂect on how far in our culture that opposi-tion between entering and exiting life is mirrored. What was I after? What would Iwant? First of all, I wanted the fatal boundary, dividing two not just separate butopposing phases of life, to be acknowledged and made visible. Meanwhile, every-thing in culture indicated, instead, the desire to blur that boundary. The adultscontinued to live as if they were still living the same life as young people, not adifferent one. I do not deny that there is a vitality in an adult and even in an oldman, however it is not really the same kind, it is readily a vitality that exists ‘‘in spiteof’’ the dying. Yet it was exactly these already dying people who had the advantage.They wielded the power accumulated in the course of their lives and it was theywho created and imposed culture. Culture was the work of the elderly—the workof the dying.It was enough for me to bind myself emotionally to Retiro for one secondfor the language of culture to begin to sound false and empty. Truths. Slogans.Philosophies. Morals. Religions. Codes. All of this was as if it were in another key,imagined, said, written by people already partially eliminated from existence, wholacked a future . . . the heavy work of the burdened, the awkward work of the stiff . . .while there, in Retiro, all of that culture dissolved in some sort of young insufﬁ-178Volume 1ciency, young undevelopment, young immaturity, it became ‘‘worse,’’ becausesomeone who can still develop is always ‘‘worse’’ than his ultimate realization. Thepositively demonic secret of the Retiro was that nothing there could reach fullexpression, everything had to be substandard, introductory, undone, drowning ininferiority. . . . Yet this was precisely a lively life, worthy of admiration, the highestembodiment of it that is accessible to us. Nietzscheism and its afﬁrmation of life?Why Nietzsche didn’t have the least idea about these things, it is difﬁcult toimagine something more tawdry, ridiculous, or in worse taste than his supermanand his young human beast, no, it’s not true, not completeness but inadequacy,worseness, inferiority, immaturity are appropriate to that which is still young, i.e.,alive. Then I was not yet aware that various existentialisms (which did not becomewell known until after the war) were battering their brains over difﬁculties some-what similar to mine, tied to the desire to understand life in the raw, in motion. Tryto understand my loneliness and the internal contradiction which became a crackthroughout my entire artistic undertaking: as an artist I was called to strive forperfection, but I was drawn by imperfection; I was supposed to create values,however something like subvalue or imperfect value was what I really valued. Iexchanged the Venus de Milo, Apollo, the Parthenon, the Sistine Chapel and allthe Bach fugues for one trivial joke expressed with the lips of those related todegradation, with lips that were themselves degraded. . . .It is time now to end these conﬁdences. Nothing of what I write here hasbeen ‘‘solved’’ in me. Everything has remained in ferment until now. Perhapselsewhere I will tell how in the following years the incursion of my homeland, ofPoland, into my life removed me from the Retiro and partially returned me toother issues. If I have had to externalize these Argentine experiences, it is becauseit is important for a man speaking publicly—a man of letters—to lead his readerbeyond the facade of form, into the boiling cauldron of his private history. Is itridiculous, even humiliating? Only children or kindhearted aunts (whose spin-sterish innocence is, unfortunately, an important factor in public opinion) canimagine that a writer is a calmly sublime being, a lofty spirit instructing about his‘‘talent,’’ about what is Good and Beautiful from on high. No, a writer does not siton peaks, but climbs to them from the bottom. Who would dare to demandseriously that we untie all the Gordian knots of existence on paper? Man is weakand limited. Man cannot be stronger than he is. An increase in man’s strength can1955179follow only when another man lends him strength. The task before a man ofletters, therefore, is not to solve problems, but only to pose them so that they attractgeneral attention and ﬁnd their way to people. There they will be ordered andsomehow civilized.And I want to add in closing that the feeling of my own impotence in theface of this problem inclined me in the following years to back out of theories andinto people, into the concreteness of human beings. Two clear and important tasksemerged from the fog of the Retiro: deciding whether or not I would be able toexpress myself more honestly in the future or whether I would be forced to hidemyself. The ﬁrst of these was obvious: to impose a ﬁrst-rateness on that second-rateword ‘‘boy,’’ to build one more altar onto all the ofﬁcial altars on which the younggod of worseness, inferiority, insigniﬁcance, could stand in all of his power, boundto inferiority. Here was the necessary broadening of our consciousness: to intro-duce into art at least that second pole of becoming, to name the human form thatbinds us to insufﬁciency, to force others to pay homage to it! But here emerged yetanother task, because even touching this subject with the tip of my pen was impos-sible without a prior liberation from ‘‘manliness’’ and, in order to be able to talk orwrite about this, I had ﬁrst to overcome my own fear of insufﬁciency in this regard,my fear of femininity. Ah! I knew the masculinity that they, men, fabricated amongthemselves, goading each other into it, mutually forcing themselves to it in a panic-stricken fear at the woman in themselves. I knew men straining to attain Mas-culinity, convulsed males, giving each other lessons in manliness. This type of manartiﬁcially magniﬁed his traits: he exaggerated his heaviness, brutality, strength,and seriousness, and it was he who raped, conquered by force. He was afraid,therefore, of beauty and grace, which are the weapons of weakness, he lost himselfin male monstrosity and was becoming licentious and trivial or dull and clumsy.The highest realization of this ‘‘school’’ was probably those banquets of drunkenofﬁcers from the czarist guards who tied ropes to each other’s male organs andyanked on them under the table. Whoever could not bear it and cried out, paid forsupper. One could say that the spirit of this enhanced masculinity appeared ineverything in history. I saw how this panic-stricken masculinity deprived such mennot only of a sense of measure, but of all intuition in dealing with the world: wherehe needed to be ﬂexible, he inﬂicted himself, pushing and ﬂaying noisily withhis whole being. Everything became excessive: heroism, severity, might, virtue.180Volume 1Whole nations threw themselves like bulls onto the sword of the toreador inparoxysms, in the mad fear that the audience might attribute something of theEwig-Weibliche to them. . . . So I had no doubt that the magniﬁed bull mightcharge me, too, if he scented my attack on his priceless genitalia.In order to prevent this, I had to ﬁnd a different position for myself—beyond man and woman—which would nevertheless not have anything to do witha ‘‘third sex’’—an asexual and purely human position from which I could beginairing these stuffy and sexually ﬂawed areas. So as not to be primarily a man, but ahuman being who just happens to be a man. Not to identify with masculinity, notto want it. If I could get out of this masculinity openly and decisively, its judgmentof men would lose its bite and I could then say much about certain inexpressiblethings.These projects, however, remained projects. Later in Argentina, the neces-sity of having to work for a living oppressed me to such a degree that all long-termand large-scale realizations of this project became a technical impossibility. I couldnot concentrate. Bureaucracy swallowed me up and overwhelmed me with itslittle papers and its absurdity while real life receded from me like the sea at lowtide. I wrote Trans-Atlantic with the last remnants of my strength: you will ﬁndmany of the experiences related here in that book. After that I was sentenced topart-time literary work, like this diary where I cannot communicate anything toyou except a cursory, meagerly discursive, almost journalistic synopsis, on Sundaysand holidays. Too bad. But let this at least be a clue to my entry into another,painful homeland, into Argentina, which was fated to me and from which I wouldnot know how to tear myself away today.
Monday
Not without inﬂuence on the jotting down of these reminiscences is thefact that not long ago the police in Buenos Aires executed a huge cleanup of thelocal Corydonism. A few hundred people were arrested. But what can the policedo when confronted with a disease? Arrest cancer? Fine people for typhus?It would be better, therefore, to uncover the subtle bacillus of the diseasethan to quell the symptoms. But who is really sick here? Only the sick? Or thehealthy as well? I do not share the narrow thinking that sees only a ‘‘sexual devia-1955181tion’’ in all this. Deviation, yes—but it has its source in the fact that matters of ageand beauty are not adequately open and free in ‘‘normal’’ people. This is just one ofour most burdensome silences and weaknesses.Don’t you feel that here even your health becomes hysterical? You areinhibited, gagged, unconfessed.I, therefore, want to speak out. I must say this though about the following:none of this is categorical. Everything is hypothetical. Everything is dependent—why should I conceal this?—on the effect it has.That characteristic deﬁnes everything that I have produced as a writer. Ihave tried various roles. I assume various postures. I impose various meanings onmy experiences and if one of these meanings is accepted by people, I live on in it.This is what is youthful in me. Placet experiri, as Castorp said. I assume thatthis is also the only way of transferring an idea, that the sense of someone’s life,someone’s work is deﬁned between one given human being and another. It is notonly I who imposes meaning on myself. Others impose meaning as well. From theclash of these interpretations arises a third meaning, which delineates me.
XVI
Monday
The wail of sirens, whistles, streamers, corks popping from bottles and thetumult of a large city in great throes. The New Year 1955 enters at this verymoment. I am walking down Corrientes Street, alone and distraught.I see nothing before me . . . no hope. Everything is coming to an end for meand nothing wants to begin. An account? After so many tense years full of hard work,who am I? A clerk exhausted by seven hours of clerking, stiﬂed in all writing ven-tures. I cannot write anything except for what I write in this diary. Everything suffersbecause for seven hours every day I commit murder on my own time. I have put somuch effort into literature only to have it be incapable of assuring me minimalmaterial independence, a minimum—even—of personal dignity. ‘‘A writer?’’ Whatdo you mean? On paper! In life, zero, an inferior being. If fate was supposed topunish me for my sins, I would not protest. But I have been annihilated for myvirtues.Who am I to blame? The times? People? How many others have been even182Volume 1more thoroughly ravaged. I have not been successful insofar as they wiped thestreets with me and today, when I am ﬁnally respected here and there, there is noplace for me. I am as homeless as if I did not live on earth but instead weresuspended somewhere in interplanetary space, like a separate globe.
Wednesday
A letter from a woman in Canada (received in early December, whichmeans she must have written it after reading the Diary fragments in the Novemberissue of Kultura):
‘‘My Dear Mr. Gombrowicz:. . . I am writing because I am angry at you, and because I am worriedthat you are entering your ‘age of defeat’ so calmly, without embarrassment. Sowhat. Are others supposed to do all the work for you? I gather, that is, fear thatthe Argentine pampa has already overcome you and you are forgetting that youshould live a little before you die. It looks as if you are dying at a gallop—although, of course, that dying could be half a century at variance with theother dying after which you won’t even be able to write fragments from a diary,or even reminiscences of supper or a pair of shoes.At ﬁrst what you wrote had a polemical, controversial character, itprovoked a reaction, even though it may have been negative, it was strong. Thelast ‘diaries’ provoke no reaction in me, beyond the amazement that you writethat stuff and that Kultura prints it.And I am very worried. Because if you so stubbornly insist on ruiningyourself, then who will be able to help you? It seems to me that you are beingobstinate. Is there a way out of this impasse?Do you realize that lately you have been limiting yourself in thesefragments to preaching: what the new art, literature, form, is, what it should beor what it should not be; and why this or that fellow seems absolutely lousy ornot quite lousy.Yet you yourself are not an art or literary critic. You are called a writer,you are supposed to create literature; therefore, you should create, not commenton what others have written (mainly what others have not written).And what do you stand to gain from the knowledge of modern issues or1955183the spirit or tone of modernity. An artist feels the tone in which he can create—and whether or not that is a modern tone or one a hundred years ahead, is nothis business. Nor is it whether or not other writers are in keeping with the tone orare atonal, or whether they exist at all.If you feel like creating in some sort of modern way, it is insigniﬁcantwhether you will be closer to Dali or Sartre—just so you create. Unfortunately,these échantillons found in the ‘fragments’ are made rather than created. There isin them no inspiration, conviction, or former panache. There is mainly negation.I am convinced that you are ruining yourself and that only some sort ofdrastic catapulting can interrupt this process.’’
She is worried? And she wants to catapult me? It is true that the diary in theNovember issue came out carelessly—a few loose notes and a vacation story aboutcrocodiles. But why should I always shoot from a cannon? And what if I feel likecoming out with a BB gun to shoot sparrows or a crocodile?The letter is characteristic in many respects but above all as witness to thatstiﬂing pressure to which readers always subject the author. Don’t write this, writeonly that. . . . Be serious only. Inspired only. Don’t be a critic. Don’t think, whyshould you think . . . (I know this Polish school of non-thinking). A whole list ofrestrictions reminiscent . . . of what? . . . today’s restrictions on currency andcommodity exchanges.She would like me to write only things that are important (to her) andarouse controversy. But I am also writing my own story in this diary. That is, notwhat is important to her or you but to me. I need each of these monologues, eachgives me a light impulse. Does my story bore you? That is evidence that you do notknow how to read your own from it. She, for example, is outraged that I madepublic my supper and pair of shoes. You should have greeted me with peals oflaughter-ﬁlled triumph and drumrolls because thanks to me a fact without signiﬁ-cance for anyone but me was announced urbi et orbi. If one were allowed to writeonly about universal matters, what sort of literature would announce the existenceof private soup and a private pair of shoes? Literature, after all, should includeeverything.What is a diary if not this especially: private writing done for one’s ownprivate use? This other starting point of the diary differentiates it from all other184Volume 1genres—and how profound it is! Literature has a dual signiﬁcance and a dual root:it is born of pure artistic contemplation, of the selﬂess striving for art, but it is alsoan author’s personal settling of accounts with people, an instrument in the battlewaged for a spiritual existence. It is something that matures in isolation, creation inand of itself, but it is also something social, an imposition on people, yes, a publiccreation of oneself with the help of people. It stems from a hunger for Beauty,Goodness, and Truth, but it is also a desire for fame, signiﬁcance, popularity,triumph. The diary of a writer, expressing this other, personal aspect of literature,complements a work that is purely artistic. And we will receive a complete pictureof creativity (the author’s work) only if we see the author in these two dimensions:as a selﬂess, objective artist and a man ﬁghting for himself among people.But in that case don’t demand that a diary be written only for your satisfac-tion, like a cheap novel or feuilleton, as it is also, perhaps even more so, a battlewaged with you, a ‘‘getting you acquainted’’ with the author, ﬁlling you withsomeone else’s existence, which needs you, but which may seem dispensable. Andif you want this kind of private writing to exist at all, you would be wise not tointerfere at all in my work. I would go crazy if I had to take every little whim—fromthe complimentary to the sour—into consideration. Make sure that my diary con-tains the indispensable minimum of intelligence and vitality, that is, as much asthe average level of the printed word demands it—but as for the excess, leave me afree hand. I put many different things into this bag—a speciﬁc world to which youwill grow accustomed only insofar as it gains power over you; until then much ofthis will seem superﬂuous to you, will even amaze you that it qualiﬁes at all to bepublished.
Thursday
Should I tell or not? A year ago, more or less, the following happened tome. I stopped in a café on Callao Street to use the bathroom. . . . All kinds ofdrawings and scribblings were on the walls. Yet the unconscious urge would neverhave assailed me, like a poisonous dart, if I hadn’t accidentally fumbled across apencil in my pocket. The pencil turned out to be an ink pen.Enclosure, isolation, the certainty that nobody would see, some sort ofstillness . . . and the murmur of water whispered: do it, do it, do it. I took out the1955185pencil. I wet the tip. I wrote on the wall, high up so it would be hard to erase, Iwrote something quite vulgar in Spanish like:‘‘Ladies and gentlemen, please comply . . .’’S— — not on the toilet seat but straight in its eye!’’I hid the pen. Opened the door. I walked through the whole café andmingled with the crowd on the street. And the grafﬁto remained.From that time on, I exist with the awareness that my grafﬁto is still there.I hesitated to disclose this. I hesitated not for reasons of prestige but be-cause the written word should not serve to spread certain . . . manias. But I won’thide the fact that never would I have dreamed that such things could be this . . .electrifying . . . and I can hardly refrain from reproaching myself. I wasted so manyyears without tasting this inexpensive and risk-free delight. There is something inthis . . . something strange and intoxicating . . . resulting most likely from thehorrible openness of the grafﬁto, which is there on the wall, in union with theabsolute secrecy of the perpetrator who cannot be found out. And also because thisis not at all on the level of my work. . . .
Friday
Yet somehow I have made it. . . . This is almost like fame. At any rate,respect. It would seem, Gombrowicz, that you have triumphed on this home frontand can now intoxicate yourself with the sight of those confounded faces . . . whichconsidered you a clown not too long ago. Revenge is the delight of the gods! Thathussy can no longer act brazenly toward you. That cretin had to back down fromhis opinion. I am walking in glory. But this glory . . . hmm . . . no, dullness cannotbe conquered! It is invincible!Yesterday I met Mrs. X., whose ears had picked up news of my manytriumphs. After greeting me she looked at me with a certain approval and said:—‘‘Well, well . . . Congratulations . . . you have gotten serious!’’Accursed woman! So you still have not come to the conclusion that I wasserious when you considered me a fop. You think I have gotten serious only sincemy triumphs!
BBB186Volume 1She said: You have an easy life. I said: Why do you think that I have an easylife? She said: You have talent! You can write whatever you feel like writing andyou have recognition and various daily amenities.I said: But do you realize what it costs in effort to write? She said: Whenone has talent, everything comes easy. I said: Why ‘‘talent’’ is an empty word, inorder to write one has to be someone, one must work on oneself unstintingly, evenﬁght with oneself, it’s a matter of development. . . . She said: Tsk, tsk, why shouldyou work if you have talent. If I had the talent, I would write, too.
BBB
You write? Everybody is writing nowadays. I myself have written a novel. I:Really? She: Yes, and I even got some pretty good reviews. I: Congratulations! She:Oh, I’m not saying this to ﬁsh for compliments, I merely wanted to emphasize thateverybody is writing nowadays. It’s something that everybody can do.
Saturday
It would be lethal if I, taking after many Poles, delighted in the period ofindependence (1918–1939); if I did not dare to look it straight in the eyes with thecoldest lack of ceremony. I ask that you not consider my coolness a cheap strivingfor effect. The air of freedom was given to us so that we could begin to come toterms with an enemy more tormenting than the taskmasters we have had up tonow: ourselves. After our struggles with Russia, with Germany, a struggle withPoland awaited us. It is not surprising, therefore, that independence turned out tobe more burdensome and humiliating than bondage. As long as we were absorbedwith the revolt against a foreign power questions such as ‘‘Who are we?’’ ‘‘What arewe to make of ourselves?’’ lie dormant, but independence awakened the riddle thatwas slumbering within us.Along with the restoration of freedom arose the problem of existence.Because in order to really exist, we would have to make ourselves over. But such amake-over was beyond our power, our freedom was superﬁcial, in the very struc-ture of the nation were duplicity and violence which inhibited our undertakings.And our weakness warned us not to touch ourselves—because, well, everything was1955187ready to fall apart. We wore the Poland of that time on our chests like Don Quixotewore his armor, preferring not to test its strength, just in case.The period of Polish independence was not a joyous creation, but a painfulstruggle with the invisible thread of our own inner slavery. A period of codedexistence, a period of great masquerade. If I were writing the history of the litera-ture of that time I would not ask why those writers were outstanding, but why,being outstanding, they could not be completely outstanding. One should writethe history of that literature backward, that is, as the history of that which was notdone. It would be better to be proud and to be ﬁrm in casting off everything thatwas really not to our size; only this approach will shield us from humiliation. If Iwere writing the history of literature . . . But I cannot write it because I amunfamiliar with the majority of those nauseating books, I know a little about Polishpoetry and prose, but I looked through rather than read them and my concept ofPolish writing is a synthesis of many impressions, of what I read, what was said,what was in the air. Who cares. One spoonful of soup is enough to know whether ittastes good—and why it doesn’t . . . and I express myself not as a researcher andbrowser but as one who ate regularly in the cafeteria.First one general thought: whatever the means of expression a literaturechooses, realistic, fantastic, romantic, it must always be bound most intimately toreality—because even fantasy is important only insofar as it leads us into theessence of things more deeply than the commonness of a sober mind could do it.Thus the decisive moment for determining the authenticity of a literature or thespiritual life of a nation will be exactly this: how close were they to reality.I would like to take a look at the period 1918–1939 from this standpoint.Let us ﬁrst occupy ourselves with the group of writers who formed theminds that were about to enter into independence.Sienkiewicz. I have already written about Sienkiewicz. Sienkiewicz is thekind of daydream we allow ourselves to have before we fall asleep . . . or dream. . . .Fiction then? Lies? Self-deception? Spiritual debauchery?Yet he is probably the most real fact of our literary life. None of our writersis even half as real as Sienkiewicz—I mean to say that he was truly read and readwith pleasure. Therefore: it was not a real or even a deceptive world that hecreated, but a very real inﬂuence that he exercised. Was he an illusion or did he188Volume 1really exist and more than the others? Let us take into consideration that ﬁctionwhich changes something in the world also becomes reality. Sienkiewicz did notwaste ﬁve minutes concerning himself with absolute truth. He did not belong tothose whose predatory gaze rips apart masks and he did not have a penny’s worth ofsolitude in him. He was social in essence, eager for company, and he wanted toplease. It was more important for him to be joined to people than to be joined tothe truth. He was a person who sought conﬁrmation of his existence in someoneelse’s being.And because his nature did not seek truth, but a reader, he developed anincredible scent when it came to undercovering a need that he could satisfy.Thence his spiritual plasticity, that complete and completely sincere adjustment tothat which made up the needs of the masses. And because he formed himself forpeople, he was also formed by people: this resulted in such a fabulous homogene-ity of style, a form delightfully permeated with humanity and light, a capacity formythologizing, a sense of one of the greatest and most difﬁcult dangers to discoverin art, the danger of boredom. Sienkiewicz is authentic insofar as needs (even ifthere is a need for duplicity) create values.And here is the paradox: in this sense, the conservative Sienkiewicz is aprecursor of the revolutionary today. This ‘‘believing’’ writer is subconsciouslyclose to the philosophy that topples absolute values and lives with a dialectic ofrelative values, resulting from needs, where man becomes a measure of value.Sienkiewicz’s faith? I am inclined to believe that for him God was a means ofintimacy with the nation. Would a Bolshevist, atheistic Sienkiewicz be an impos-sibility? On the contrary, it is possible to the extent that if Polish Communistcontemporaneity ever produces its great novelist, it will be precisely Sienkiewicz àrebours.He, however, did not see himself this way. He was not aware of this. And ifhe had been aware, it would have ﬁnished him on the spot as Sienkiewicz. ForSienkiewicz is existence not in the world but in a certain world—in a segment ofthe world, in a simulated world that one accepts as the real world and whose roots,tying one to reality, one does not wish to know. Sienkiewicz was unaware of thismechanism, and this keeps him from being fully modern.
BBB1955189As for iZeromski . . . he was probably deeper and loftier than Sienkiewicz.But he is ﬂawed, too, that is, the ﬂute, made of two types of raw material, does notsound purely.What was welded together so poorly that it caused this dissonance? iZerom- ski is all sex, love, instinct, he was fashioned by Eros, this is his country, here he is athome, here he is most tender, delicate, eloquent. But the lover became a citizen,the hunter of amorous thrills changes himself into a teacher, the tracker of passion-ate frenzy becomes a social activist and his undulating, bitter, waivering lyricismbegins to hover over Poland with a sow’s concern. Out of this arose the glasshouses, the repugnant mixture of rainbow and habitable house, which he attachedto the landscape willy-nilly, that lethal metaphor.The mixing of sex with the homeland . . . why didn’t it produce anything?Love lyricism is only superﬁcially individual, this state of the soul results fromsubmitting oneself to the species: the species inﬂicts violence on a person in loveand there is no signiﬁcant difference between the soldier dying for his homelandand the lover who risks his life to possess his beloved. Both fulﬁll a call that is moreimportant than anything personal—he who defends the group and he who pro-longs its existence in children, born of women, to whom instinct inclined him.But in iZeromski, the feeling of love is ultimate and tragic. iZeromski the distiller of amorous elixirs is naked. iZeromski the patriot is, it is true, conscienceand heart, but he is also a man with a goatee, a citizen and ‘‘Polish’’ writer. WheniZeromski divines love he is disinterested, ruthless, freewheeling, but when he talksabout Poland a thousand viewpoints assail him—yet here one cannot be exclu-sively tragic, one must be constructive and positive. And that is why iZeromski’s nakedness dons the Homeland just as one would a shirt. An unsavory sight.He, who had nothing of the novelist and everything of the poet in him,began to write social novels—and they are strange, to say the least. They are loftyand shallow at the same time, made of incisive perceptions and engaging inspira-tions, yet, at the same time, everything that goes into them as a more massiveelement of the composition is naive and clumsy. Here individual sentences areinspired but the characters, the plot, the novel’s ideas, psychology, sociology, dia-logues, views of society are made banal and naive in some inconceivable way, asif Rodziewiczówna had butted into his inspiration and that iZeromskian heroic self-sacriﬁce, stuffed with social do-gooding, philanthropy, folk gatherings, noble190Volume 1suffering, socialism, that’s all unreal . . . and becomes not ﬁrst-, but second-, class.He did not know how to choose themes. Here we have a high-caliber writer whocould not ﬁnd a place for himself in the subject matter.These things become understandable to me when I imagine iZeromski’s development as an artist, the early forming of his style. Fate placed him in theregions of sex and love, but slowly, as he developed intellectually, the pressure ofother issues, concerning Poland, the people, injustice, and hurt, began to impingeupon him and his conscience began to torment him. That is what he wanted towrite about! But how? Everyone knows that art demands coolness, an artist ex-presses himself with precision and force in inverse proportion to his emotionalengagement in a subject. He must see objectively whatever there is to see, there-fore he must be disinterested. Frankly speaking, of all emotions, the most inhibit-ing is respect. An artist must hold the reins of his subject and, what is more, he mustdelight in it. But who was iZeromski in the face of those issues? Was it possible todomesticate, annex, or subordinate them, to take them into one’s hands? Or didone have to serve them and devote oneself and one’s work to serving these higherissues? His conscience did not allow him to ignore these problems. Nor did it allowhim to handle the material creatively and freely. And this is how respect and loveweakened his hand. He didn’t dare be adequately sensual, instead he becamemodest, docile, serious, and responsible. No play, no delight with his own motherand so these honorable contents invaded his art and personality in crudo, un-digested, undistilled. That which he treated with respect did not enter his blood-stream and this love did not possess his Poland, he respected her too much.
BBB
As for Wyspia ´ nski . . . He was the antithesis of Sienkiewicz, who surren-dered to his readers. Wyspia ´ nski surrendered to art and, note this well, to bombas-tic art. Sienkiewicz aimed directly at vanquishing souls, Wyspia ´ nski at being anArtist; Sienkiewicz sought people, Wyspia ´ nski—art and greatness. A world of ab-stractions in which concepts replace people, a world of culture.The boredom of his plays . . . Who understood anything in their liturgy.Wyspia ´nski is one of our greatest embarrassments because never had our admira-tion been born in such a vacuum. Applause, homage—our emotions in his theaterhad nothing to do with us. What was the secret of his triumph? Wyspia ´ nski also1955191fulﬁlled certain needs, but these were needs removed as far as possible from anindividual life, they were the needs of a Nation. The Nation needed a statue. TheNation demanded great art. The dramatic stance of a Nation demanded a nationaldrama. The Nation needed someone who would celebrate its greatness on a grandscale. Wyspia ´ nski stepped before the Nation and said: Behold, you have me!Nothing petty, greatness itself and with nothing less than Greek columns. He wasaccepted.A playwright. Of course the drama form has always counted on greatness: itis a net through which everything small escapes. It is also true that it is the triﬂe thatis creative, the detail that is concrete, not monumentality. Wyspia ´ nski, too statues-que to focus on detail, was condemned to an exclusive coexistence with theelements and elementary powers: Fate, Poland, Greece, Nike, or The Mulch.*This art, unlike Shakespeare or Ibsen, is not an elevation of ordinary life to dra-matic heights (don’t talk to me about The Wedding), here everything from thebeginning to the end rolls across the heaven of History and Fate. When thematerial itself is magniﬁed, however, the artist becomes small and powerless.Wyspia ´nski set into motion the pathetic machinery that crushed him. That is whythe production is so enormous and why his own message to Poles is so insigniﬁ-cant. To Poles and others. This play fell on its face abroad not because it was Polish,but because it offers nothing enriching from a universal perspective.Greece? The Greek drama was something natural to the Greeks and itharmonized with their youthful experiencing of being. For us, however, Greekdrama is only authoritative, it affects us by virtue of its historical dignity, as doesGreece itself. Wyspia ´ nski’s Greekness is only majestic decoration. It is not some-thing that enlivens and puriﬁes seeing, it is merely solemn.Which indicates that this alleged realist was a hundred miles from reality.Wyspia ´nski sees no concrete phenomena, he is agog with their conceptual syn-theses and sublimations. A drama of concepts. A great scene designer. He madesplendid decorations. He did everything to assure the pathos of a play. He evenstepped on stage, but, overcome by the might of its decorations, said nothing.
BBB
*Symbol of inertia in Wyspia ´ nski’s play The Wedding.192Volume 1Let’s talk about Przybyszewski, he took his toll of that generation, too.Przybyszewski was the only one who could have achieved a revision of our values,or at least strengthened our life with a series of rousing, and in their extremity,categorical myths. It is not important that he imported the Secession and a bohe-mian life-style. It is more important that he undermined our virtuous, clean, andcitizenlike concept of art and introduced the concept of artistic creation as ademonic process into the Polish idyll. His was the ﬁrst ruthless art in Poland: an artthat accommodated nothing, being an unmerciful spiritual unburdening. He wasthe ﬁrst among us to demand a voice.But what a caricature! What a clown and jester! It is difﬁcult to view hisdemise into shoddiness, his transmutation of hero into melodramatic actor withoutfeeling embarrassment. A ﬁrst-rate talent that calmly and matter-of-factly fords intobuffoonery, unaware, oblivious to its own kitsch, blind to its own transformation.How do we explain an imagination that has gone pretentious, unsavory, twisted,shrill? Do we say it suffered from Przybyszewskiitis? The direction of Europeanthought that spawned him had been a step away from the ridiculous, but it hadnever deteriorated into the ridiculous: if Schopenhauer was stylistically ﬂawless,then Nietzsche and Wagner, people of German Romanticism or French andScandinavian demonism had often rubbed up against an emphatic kitsch. Yet ittook a Pole for that seed to grow into a tree of obvious ridiculousness and kitsch. Arewe incapable of demonism to this degree?Here again we have the Pole’s powerlessness in the face of culture. For aPole, culture is not something of which he is a cocreator, it is something higher,superhuman, which comes to him from the outside and that is how it appeals tohim. What appealed to Przybyszewski? The Nation? Art? Literature? God? Przyby-szewski has something in him of the provincial allowed to dine at the most aristo-cratic table in Europe, but it is not Europe that appeals to him as much asPrzybyszewski. There is nothing that appeals to a Pole as much as a Pole in ahistorical dimension. Nothing inhibits him as much as his own greatness. Just asPi™sudski was crushed by and even terriﬁed of Pi™sudski, just as Wyspia ´ nski couldnot crawl out from under the burden of Wyspia ´ nski, just as Norwid moaned andgroaned from under the Norwid on his back, so Przybyszewski watched Przyby-szewski with fear and holy terror. In everything he writes you hear: I am Przyby-szewski! I am a demon! I am the revealer!1955193The incapacity to reconcile the everyday and ordinary with greatness, orwith loftiness . . . If he had maintained the hearing, taste, and sight of an ordinaryman, an attack of convulsive laughter would have saved him from demonic pir-ouettes. But, being a Pole, he had to kneel. And so he knelt before himself.
BBB
Kasprowicz. Whole-grain bread, soul of a dove, pure gold troubadour . . .But also: a peasant-traitor, false yeoman, an unnatural nature, artiﬁcial simplicity.After leaving the peasantry and becoming an intellectual, Kasprowicz wanted toremain a peasant—as an intellectual.This is the source of his artistic inadequacy. He, a creature of mixed origin,a combination of city and country, was, in essence, disharmony, but he character-ized himself as harmony. If his song had been honest, he would have been abouquet of dissonance, the poetry of a person of mixed ancestry, the hymn of astrange creature born of opposite elements. He, however, preferred to don a peas-ant’s homespun over his frock coat.Kasprowicz: the highest achievement of Polish ‘‘folk’’ poetry, which was aserious misunderstanding as that which is a poetry about the peasantry is taken forpeasant poetry. The peasantry becomes a poetic inspiration only when we look at itfrom the city through the binoculars of culture. A peasant as a peasant was certainlynot poetry to a peasant. What is more artiﬁcial than when Kasprowicz makes himselfa peasant to sing the beauties of nature? Why a peasant doesn’t feel nature, he is in it,therefore, he does not notice it, he grapples with it, he lives off of it, but he doesn’tworship it. Leave sunrises and sunsets to tourists. Everything in a peasant’s world isordinary, so he pays no attention to it. If a peasant adores anything at all it is the city,not the countryside. To a peasant, God manifests himself in a machine and not in awayside poplar. He prefers cheap perfume to the smell of lilacs.Would I forbid Kasprowicz from setting into motion this paean to thecountryside? Not at all, let him draw it forth if it lives in him. The question is: Howis he supposed to sing? As a peasant or as Kasprowicz?And it would be more real if he did not try to have a style. If he did notshield his inner disharmonies with simplicity. If in art, instead of form, he gave ushis struggle with form. Perhaps this would liberate him from his artiﬁcial folksinessand from his literary forebears. I would dress Kasprowicz in peasant trousers and194Volume 1boots from the waist down and from the waist up, I would have him wear a jacketwith a stiff collar. This is how I would send him on stage saying: Do what you can!
BBB
I do not deny that these were artists and teachers of some stature. But theywere not teachers of reality. Sienkiewicz did not express reality, because he surren-dered himself to the services of collective fantasy; Wyspia ´ nski, because he devotedhimself to aesthetic and historical abstractions; iZeromski, because he was unable to reconcile his social mission with his instinct; Przybyszewski, because he becameintoxicated with satanisms; and Kasprowicz, who allowed the Folk to govern him.In order for a writer to ‘‘reach’’ reality, he must do both simultaneously: express thecollective spirit but also his own individual existence. He must be an individualitycontrolled by the collectivity, but also a collectivity controlled by an individual.They drowned in the mass or in those abstractions—such as nation, history, art—which were the product of collective culture. And they were always someone’sservants. They were always on their knees before something or other (Positivism?But that was also something just for the nation, almost a political doctrine, not thepositivism of an individual human being. I see that I have forgotten to mentionPrus. What a shame!).We greeted our independence in that uncomfortable, kneeling position.What would a liberated man have to do? Get up, stretch, rub his eyes, look around,and start from scratch: who am I, where am I, what is my assignment?But independence didn’t restore our freedom: not in feeling or seeing. Thenation became politically free, while each of us saw ourselves even more shackledand internally weakened than ever before. What had that resurrected state been ifnot a call to new service and to a humble new subservience. The state was a patientbarely able to stand on its own two feet, and everything else, as urgent and intol-erant of delay as it may have been, had to give way to one goal: strengthen the state.They said:You shall have no thought that might weaken the nation or state.You shall note, think, and feel only that which strengthens the nationand state.This caused a perplexity in us which, in my opinion, is the key to under-1955195standing the whole period of independence. Note, we were called to give up a fulland authentic individual existence not for the beneﬁt of some other authenticityand strength, but on behalf of a partial existence, which could attain nothingbecause it was marked by inadequacy. Poland, which we were supposed to satewith our own most living individual blood, was frail economically and militarily,politically situated between two concepts of sinister power, culturally ailing fromanachronism. Such a state could not conduct reasonable politics, could not ac-complish anything at all, it had to make do with occasional patching and withburying its head in the sand. And what was worse, it was neither a large nor a smallstate: it was big enough to be called to historical action, but too small to be able tohandle the task.This spawned an unreal, tawdry, grotesque atmosphere that covered thetwo interwar decades with soot. Unreality because we simply did not have themeans by which to make contact with life. Even so we were ruining ourselves tomaintain a huge army, but the army turned out to be an illusion. We limitedourselves spiritually and intellectually, but our state and national thought did notgrow the stronger for it. As for the tawdriness—why our most fabulous talents had tocome to waste in the pincers of that double, individual and collective, anemia, justas technical, ﬁnancial, and social endeavors were wasted. And this was grotesque aswell—for the grotesque is a sign of inability, the factory label for cheap goods.I am not considering all of Polish life—I am talking just about the litera-ture. It is possible that we had no choice in the political and economic arenas, sowe did what we could however we could. But the freedom of art is a hundred timesgreater and I believe that, given even the circumstances in Poland at that time, realart was possible.What’s more, I believe that in those circumstances the most importantand immediate task of art was not to allow contact with reality to be lost. Tobreak through that reduced life to the real, full existence and become an anchorthat would have moored us in elementary being. Why did art fail us utterly inthis regard?Ah, because of one small oversight . . . I will return to this subject in thenear future. I will tell how one slight mistake in the choice of direction made itimpossible for us to get out of our blind alley.196Volume 1XVII
Sunday
Today I am devoting a little time to revisiting those years—of indepen-dence. To destroy them. My present dire predicament demands this. If I agreeinwardly that they were the way they were supposed to be—blossoming, healthyplants on fertile soil while I am something dying in a desert, a cripple cast onto analien shore, without a homeland, etc., . . . an exile, astray, lost . . . what would beleft except to resign from all meaning? Therefore: I have to mobilize all the strongpoints of my situation thereby showing that I can live better and more authen-tically. I will now write a little something about the (versiﬁed) poetry from theperiod of independence and I will see what of this will be capable of upholdingitself as real. . . . This curiosity—how much that which is born under my pen can bethe truth. . . .The poems of that period were better than the prose. Which is easy toexplain. The more formalistic the art, the more independent it is from the externalpressures of the milieu, the epoch. The most difﬁcult thing to do in independentPoland was to have a conversation, after that, to write in normal prose, after that, towrite in a stylized prose, and the relatively easy thing was writing to rhyme. In orderto express oneself impeccably in a normal conversation, in everyday prose, onemust be a man who can speak—one whose expression is not warped by externalconditions. But those ‘‘excellent,’’ and ‘‘wonderful’’ poems can be written by any-one bound by all conceivable shackles if one has learned form.Skamander and the Polish avant-garde . . . Yes, I remember. . . . Skamanderﬂoated to the top under the sign of a new freshness, modernization, Europeaniza-tion and the Skamander poets desired to produce a poetry that was already inde-pendent—a free and objective poetic, proud poetry that would serve no one exceptitself. A healthy idea! That intoxication with pure air was right in step with thetimes. Why did the mountain give birth to a mouse? Why did this amount tonothing? . . .Nothing. If we eliminated all the Skamander poets from our spirituallife (be careful! I am using the concept ‘‘spiritual life’’ seriously), nothing wouldhappen . . . it wouldn’t cause the slightest change. They were but they could have1955197not been. . . . We would see ourselves poorer by a certain number of metaphors andrhymes, a certain amount of beauty, also by a certain number of poetic novelties,imported or of the domestic variety, but that’s all. None of these thoroughbredpoets produced anything electrifying, nothing truly personal, no solution, no trans-mutation of reality into any kind of speciﬁc, distinct shape, as someone’s face isdistinct. They lacked a face. They had no relationship with reality. If one of themhad a so-called conviction, it did not differ in anything at all from the com-monplace political or social catechism of the epoch: S™onimski’s socialism orpaciﬁcism, Iwaszkiewicz’s aestheticism, Lecho ´ n’s Lechitism. They found theirbeliefs ready-made—they proclaimed their belonging to this or that credo, none ofthem really had an individual ritual. Outside of the rhyme, weren’t they reallychildren? Tear all the stanzas from Valéry, Claudel, or Rilke and there will remain,nonetheless, a spiritual phenomenon, a soul, someone unique and singular. BurnSkamander’s rhymes and you will see a group of affable young men, who somehowmanaged to get along in life.Keeping in mind that those were talented people, however, let us ask: towhat should we attribute this nothingness? On the strength of what malice doesart, in a given case, turn out to be an impoverishment instead of enrichment? Itwill not be difﬁcult to give an answer, if we consider that they were not in the leastinterested in enriching the form that they wielded, but merely in purifying it. Theyfound the poem polluted with various unpoetic ingredients and aimed to leave itstrictly poetic. They were pious adherents and cultivators of form, whose majestythey bore like a royal robe. They were full of respect, modest and timid. But theartist who is afraid to touch form and is incapable of treating it brutally when theneed arises—what can he do? How does one lead a poetry which is just on the vergeof maturing, which is unsanctioned and half-noble, into holy song? How does oneaccommodate its enormous, awakening contents in an undersized vessel? Suchannihilating tasks went beyond the much more timid effort of the Skamandrites,who aimed to perfect and purify expression. They were poets ‘‘by elimination’’above all, poets only in the face of things already poetic, not poets who changenonpoetry into poetry.Fine for them! That music appealed to them. If it had been otherwise, howcould they have maintained themselves in literature? Intellectually they wereentirely not on the level of their times, they did not realize what was springing up198Volume 1around them. Deprived of a personal, spiritual format . . . why, in essence, this wasa collective eruption into Polish art and those people, in spite of the fact that eachof them was distinct in regard to poetry, temperament, and thought, were quiteindistinct in the deeper sense, so that to this day the poetry of Skamander is a grouppoetry. Could, however, a real poetry arise in Poland, a poetry based on realcontact with life, without visual penetration of the walls of the house which webuilt for ourselves, and without seeing what was crouching within. They realizedtheir place only to a degree, they knew their place in art, but not the place of art inlife. They knew their place in Poland, but not Poland’s place in the world. None ofthem soared high enough to see the lay of his own home.On the other hand, they were intelligent enough to confess that Polishreality was inﬂated to a great degree. Sensing this with their infallible poeticintuition, and, at the same time, not having the least idea how to deal with this factand what conclusions to draw from it, they decided that they would not worry toomuch about reality. And that is exactly what happened. They published their littlevolumes, content that their fame was growing, but not questioning it. They werehappy to have readers, and they did not investigate that ‘‘reading’’ too closely. Theyattained higher and higher places in the hierarchy of poets, and did not examinethat hierarchy too closely, either. In short, they behaved like all (with few excep-tions) of the poets of the world and we could hold this against them only if webelieved that a poet should not be too much a poet.The Skamandrites found their opponents in the Polish avant-garde, to mymemory a nightmarish and ill-boding school. So many deformities under thoseerrant skies! I remember the strangely lopsided ﬂyers, magazines, ridiculous man-ifestos, poems somewhat revolutionary, somewhat aborted, powerful but also pow-erfully comic theories, and stacks of unavoidable little volumes. Tadeusz Peiper(blossoming metaphor) and Stefan Kordian Gacki and Braun and Wazyk andhundreds of other adepts, dedicating poems to each other . . . all that was the avant-garde for me. This production looked more or less the same in all civilized citiesand now, here, in Argentina, in cafés, I come across these old or not-so-old youthssuckling this eternal mother. In Poland, however, it was a lot dirtier—the Polishavant-garde was unkempt, slovenly, barefoot, it was a freak with a rabbi’s head andthe bare feet of a farm boy. It was a remote, forlorn backwater, which, desperate atits own provinciality, dreamed of being equal to Paris and London. This body,1955199made up of shriveled, esoteric, and word-splitting rabbis and of naive towheadednoggins from around Kielce, Lublin, or Lvov, was distinguished by a holy naïveté,a zealous fanaticism, a consistent pigheadedness. Poets. Poets, determined to bepoets, creating in themselves a poetic zeal and a poetic intoxication, poured intothat avant-garde of theirs and corked up in it as if it were a bottle.I never had the opportunity to speak seriously with any of them. Theoret-ically speaking, there was a point where we overlapped: I was ‘‘avant-garde,’’ thoughof a different design; but just their ‘‘poeticality’’ alone told me to arm myself with asarcastic face and repellent joke. Nevertheless I found them profoundly unsettling.They certainly did contribute some sort of reality, this was not merely imagined,something was crouching in all this, something real . . . but what? What? Theybrought in poverty. These luxuries were lined with a horrible poverty. They were notreality in their creations, on their pretentious paper, but they were reality as asymptom—a rash on the body of the sick man. The majority of them were deprivedof that minimum of mental prowess without which writing is impossible: indolents,decadents, dreamers, the undereducated, the aborted—the grim creations of Polishghettos, the citizens of a dingy Polish backwater. They ran from their own povertyinto a proud precursorship, this was a search for deliverance. . . .Which came. They themselves would not have dared admit that they wereborn of poverty. This truth came from the outside and one day the Polish People’sRepublic turned to them and proscribed their roles: from that time on they be-came a part of a bureaucratic literature and transformed themselves into an artbureaucracy. And because they had always been beyond themselves, not beingable to bear the truth about themselves and their own existence, supplementingreality with sleep, abstraction, theory, aesthetics, they did not have much to loseand did not even notice that something unpredictable had happened to them. Iwas not there, but I am afraid that Bolshevism found a large segment of the Polishintelligentsia in a drunken stupor, the head of the nation was muddled. And many,very many, did not realize what was happening to them.
BBB
Prose.I remember the abundance: a bumper crop of novels. And all the novels, itwould appear from the reviews, were excellent. Nevertheless, one day I had the200Volume 1following conversation with Na™kowska, apropos a certain book. She: —There aremany excellent observations, various tastes and mini-tastes, a certain, well, youknow, familiar cordiality, something special . . . and one has to penetrate this, lookat it closely, search for it. . . . I: —If you were to stare at this box of matches, youcould extract entire worlds out of it. If you search for tastes in a book, you willcertainly ﬁnd them because it was said: seek and ye shall ﬁnd. But a critic shouldnot riﬂe, search, let him sit back with folded arms, waiting for the book to ﬁnd him.Talents should not be sought with a microscope, a talent should let people knowabout itself by striking at all the bells.In periods when one’s sense of reality is feeble, however, everything be-comes automatic. Polish criticism threw itself mechanically into the pursuit ofvalues—and, it is certain, that with enough good will it is not difﬁcult to see an epiceven in Gojawiczy ´ nska, because, after all, even the average expresses something. Inorder to break with this inﬂation and regain the right proportion of phenomena,there is nothing healthier than tearing one’s eyes away from the work and taking aclose look at the author. Is the writer of this great novel great? And if he himself is notgreat, then how can the book be great? Having taken a good look at the people of theprose of that day, what do we see? That all of these novels did not give birth to evenone personality—and that not even one attains the stature of a iZeromski or Sien- kiewicz. Where did this dwarﬁng of people come from in independent Poland?There were two cut out to be more than average: Kaden and Witkacy.Kaden, who had the nerve of a stylist, a brutal aggressiveness, and a vision inembryo—could have extracted some sort of Kaden-like truth from his time. Witkie-wicz, unrestrained and penetrating, whose inspiration was cynicism and who wassufﬁciently degenerate and a madman to get himself out of Polish ‘‘normalcy’’ intothe boundless, was at the same time intelligent and conscious enough to return hismadness to the normal and tie it to reality. Both could have been great artists for fatehad jarred them out of their ‘‘normal’’ Polishness. It was they, however, whosurrendered to mannerism and utterly lost their battle for expression. Their defeatwas a repetition of the defeats of the preceding generation. Kaden declined just likeiZeromski, voluntarily surrendering his artistic sovereignty, immersing himself upto his ears in Polish life—he, a Pi™sudskiite, a ‘‘sanator,’’* a ‘‘Polish writer,’’ freedom
*Supporter of Pi™sudski’s ‘‘sanacja’’ regime.1955201ﬁghter, the father of the homeland or its son, the conscience of the nation, thedirector of theaters, an editor, already a master, already a teacher and guide.Kaden’s prose arrayed itself in a toga and began to wear a mien, and became acelebration of literature before it ever became literature. Witkiewicz ruined him-self just as Przybyszewski had, lured by his own demonism and not knowing how toreconcile the abnormal with the normal. Consequently, he was left at the mercy ofhis eccentricity. All mannerisms result from the inability to oppose form, a certainmanner of being rubs off on us, becomes habit-forming, is, as one says, strongerthan we are—and it is easy to understand why these writers weakly rooted in reality,rooted rather in Polish unreality, or, too, in ‘‘an inadequately realized reality,’’ didnot know how to defend themselves against the overgrowth of form. Kaden’s man-nerism was strained and diligent, as he was. For Witkiewicz, just as forPrzybyszewski, it became a simpliﬁcation and absolution from effort, that is whythe form both of them employ is as hurried as it is sloppy; nevertheless, Witkacy’sdefeat was more intelligent: demonism became his toy and this tragic clown diedduring his life, like Jarry, with a toothpick poked between his teeth, with histheories, pure form, plays, portraits, with ‘‘guts’’ and ‘‘bulging,’’ with pornographi-cally macabre collections. (My ﬁrst visit to Witkacy’s house: I ring the bell, the dooropens, in the dark foyer a monstrous dwarf grows before me—it is Witkacy whoopens the door all crouched over and slowly rises. . . .)These characteristics are again marked by a powerlessness in the face ofreality. Also worthy of emphasis is the dirt of their imagination: Witkiewiczian gutsand Kaden’s smacking of lips are not only the result of the thrusting of European artinto these expanses of repulsiveness, they are mainly an expression of our impo-tence in the face of the dirt that was eating at us in the peasant’s hut, in the Jewishcot, in the bathroomless country manor house. The Poles of that generation werekeenly aware of the dirt as something both odd and awful, but they did not knowwhat to do with it. It was a sore that was poisoning them.The more aggressive prose, therefore, tottered into eccentricity or into thebaroque. The prose whose pulse beat in the readable and artistically correct novels,on the other hand, was bereft of dynamism and, like honeysuckle, wound its wayfaithfully around Polish life. Mainly women. This is testimonium paupertatis: thenovel of that time relied mainly on women and was like them. Rotund lines, soft,unfocused. Conscientious, petty, kindhearted, tender. It was she who ‘‘bent over202Volume 1gray human fate with the wisdom of her heart’’ or ‘‘diligently spun a canvas ofmultiple existences into a design of sincere concern and sanctifying mercy’’—thesewere always modest, even humble, authors with a praiseworthy self-denial everready to dissolve altruistically in others, or, too, entirely into being, voices of ‘‘certaintruths’’ like Love or Mercy, which Renata or Anastasia uncovered toward the end ofthe saga in the quivering leaves or in the singing trees. . . . No one negates the talentof those D˛ abrowskas, Na™kowskas, even Gojawiczy ´ nska, no, but could this feminin-ity, dissolving into the cosmos, shape the consciousness of the nation in any way?So what is odd about women writing like women? Stranger and moremenacing is that none of the talent manifesting itself in prose was able to stay alive, itall died. This or that book occasionally resounded like cannon ﬁre. Wittlin’s Salt ofthe Earth, shining its triumphs abroad. Choroma ´ nski’s ﬁrework Medicine and Jeal-ousy was greeted with a great sounding of the bells; ﬁnally: a ‘‘great novelist’’had appeared. Bruno Schulz’s Cinnamon Shops, writing of another category, high-class. Kuncewiczowa’s Stranger, also a foretaste, foresight, the scent of somethingunexpected. . . . The trouble that these works caused the critic stemmed from what?From the fact that there was no way to gauge their real quality. A work could besimply masterly, almost brilliant in some fragment, a page could be almost foreign,universal, worldly, this author could be equal to the best in this or that regard—thiswas a writing that constantly rubbed up against genuine distinction. Yet from theseindividually brilliant works, from these fragmentary attainments arose neither agreat work nor a great writer. It was easy to see, therefore, that the short explosions oftalent were not the result of a consistent spiritual development, but merely some-thing marginal—all of this had the markings of something cramped and arbitrary.The authors themselves did not know why every once in a while something betterappeared, just like the proverbial blind chicken who ﬁnds an unexpected kernel ofcorn. This was a literature of blind chickens.
BBB
Boy Zele ´ nski, Antoni S™onimski. They were a success, two genuine events.S™onimski’s poems did not captivate me, his poetry exploded into pose, in the‘‘chronicles’’ in Wiadomo´ sci he thrust himself onto everything and everybody andhe had fun, master of organizing capers in which he himself was the hero (and,therefore, the poet). Is it silly to compare his inﬂuence to that of Sienkiewicz or1955203iZeromski? Yet I claim that a generation was brought up on him, so that one doesnot have to be a god to have followers.But this is what I consider important and interesting: that Boy and S™onim-ski, writers of the only prose in the republic that was functioning efﬁciently, was apulling down from the heights to the level of common sense and average soberthinking. Their power derived from their popping of balloons, which, after all,does not require a great deal of strength.Boy—there is not much of himself in his works. This translator was translat-ing France into Polish even in his own original writings.
BBB
Criticism. Can one really call this criticism? Each daily newspaper had itsresident schoolmaster to do the grading. It was a holy mystery, however, whycertain people and not others were the schoolmasters. It looked as if an order ofinitiated connoisseurs existed, who passed judgment. The real truth, however, wasthat no one, and not even the connoisseurs themselves, knew why they were calledto judge (they had not noticed that this simply depended on the decision of thenewspaper editor). Terriﬁed by the mechanism that elevated them—simple nobod-ies—to the role of judges of works beyond their ken, they did not know how tohandle a situation that was truly shameless and reckless: as judges they spoke fromabove, though they really found themselves at the bottom.All of this criticism was sometimes grotesquely dull witted and sometimesfairly intelligent babble about art, with distinction, ﬂourishes, froth, contortions . . .something that lives among us to this day. They watched mainly to make sure thatno one poked his nose beyond literature. It never occurred to them to confrontpoetry, prose, or criticism with reality. They knew that this would summon thetornado that would sweep them from the face of the earth.
BBB
In reality (what a dangerous word!), the literature of our period was beingborn as literary publicism. It looked as if literary journals ( Wiadomo´ sci and Prosto z Mostu) were supposed to serve writers and their writing; but in reality writersexisted so that the weekly, the only real literature of that time, could nourish itselfon them. Was this an unavoidable process that was taking place in the whole204Volume 1world? Or the consequence of the weakening of the Polish ‘‘I,’’ the ‘‘I’’ that is thebasis of creation? When writers are unsure of themselves, when none is realenough, when no one gets at the crux, and the entire direction of developmentmisses and bypasses the most essential things . . . why are we surprised when theEditor appears on the scene to conduct and organize. These weeklies were theexpression of the advantage that the collective had over the individual in Polishlife, this was just one more example in our history of subordinating art to society.The weeklies made a carnival and spectacle of art. Who is ‘‘the greatest’’?Who should be advertised? Who should trounce whom? To whom should we grantan award? Poets and writers galloped like racehorses and the broad masses roaredlike sports fans: Get him, get him! Or like a nation: This one is a Polish seer! Or‘‘ideologically’’: Give it to him on the head, the spoiler! Naturally literary journals,Wiadomo´ sci included, run by the sophisticated and sometimes too sophisticatedGrydzewski, just as Prosto z Mostu, which was run by the dull-witted Stanis™awPiasecki (who, however, died bravely, at his post), acted in keeping with theirnature. But artists felt a little out of their sauce and even a little like ﬁsh in a fryingpan. They saw that something was happening with them that was not as it shouldbe, and that they were being consumed in an unexpected way. It is signiﬁcant,however, that not one of them tried to confront what was happening head-on. Onthe contrary, they mustered all their discretion so as not to notice anything.
Wednesday
Yes, this was more or less the vacuum which that joyful writing breathed,even though it was the clamor of a hundred mouths in comparison with the silenceof today’s gagged ones. I have already said: I will not gauge the height of our ﬂightby the depth of our fall. During those years in Poland, I felt as if I were insomething that wants to be, but cannot, that wants to express itself, but is unableto. . . . What a curse! All the frustrations around me! Yet the human materialwas good and certainly no worse than any other European material. They lookedlike capable creatures, stuck doing shoddy work, inhibited by something imper-sonal, superior, interhuman, and collective emanating from the milieu. Entiresocial classes right out of a sarcastic dream: the landed gentry, the peasantry, theurban proletariat, ofﬁcers, ghettos . . . Polish thought, Polish mythology, the Polish1955205psyche . . . an inept and inefﬁcient Polishness, which permeated the heritage thatdelineated us like a subtle fume. . . . I returned from visiting my country brothersupset by the diabolical dissonance; yet in the city, cafés scufﬂing helplessly withdestiny awaited me, and people like a sandy forest full of gnarled trees.The hope of a slow perfection, gradual development and attainment couldhave been a guiding light, but should I have waited? I could not agree to have mylife be a mere introduction to life. Was I to serve in literature only as a temporarystopgap, so that I could make possible the appearance of the independent Polishword in one or two hundred years? In that case it was not worth sitting down towrite. Art that is incapable of assuring its creator an authentic existence in thespiritual sphere is only an unceasing shame, a humiliating testimony to a bungledjob. Each second I saw how one of my ‘‘friends’’ tamed a faith for himself, anideological or aesthetic position, in the hope that in the end he would become areal writer. This approach inevitably ended in a series of grimaces, a pyramid ofclaptrap, and an orgy of unreality.Either a person is someone or not—one cannot fabricate oneself artiﬁcially.In independent Poland, the artiﬁcial fabrication of existence became an ever morefrequent substitute for a genuine existence: these intellectuals and artists tried to besomeone with this arrière-pensée in order to simply be. To believe in God notbecause it is a necessity of the soul, but because faith strengthens. To be a national-ist not from nature and conviction but because it is necessary to a good life. To haveideals not because one carries them in one’s blood but because they ‘‘organizethings.’’ All of them searched feverishly for some sort of form so they wouldn’tdisintegrate . . . and I would have had nothing against this, if they had had thecourage to admit what they were doing and if they had not deceived themselves.This, however, was naive self-delusion. I, therefore, ﬁnally broke off allrelations with people in Poland and with what they were producing. I withdrewinto myself, determined to live only my own life, whatever it was, and to see onlywith my own eyes. I thought that if I were capable of being myself, then I woulddiscover solid ground beneath my feet. Shortly thereafter, however, it becameobvious that this extreme individualism could not, alone, make me any more realor creative. It solved nothing, and least of all, it did not loosen my tongue. For whatwas this ‘‘I’’ on which I wanted to base my work? Was it not formed by the past andthe present day? Wasn’t the way I was a consequence of Polish development?206Volume 1Nothing of what I did, said, thought, or wrote satisﬁed me and you probably knowthis feeling: when you notice that you are constantly saying that which you don’twant to say because the text you wrote sounds pretentious, stupid, false. For all theperversions of your upbringing, inﬂuences that shaped you, habits with which youwere vaccinated, because all of your immaturity in the face of the main issues ofbeing and culture make form impossible. I could not ﬁnd a form to express myreality. I could not, in general, describe this reality, ﬁnd my place. In these condi-tions I could only—and this is what I wrote in Ferdydurke —pretend to be a writer (modeled on other colleagues).There is only one insurmountable difﬁculty in this thing—that even Sol-omon cannot draw something from nothing. Be oneself? Yes, but if one is imma-turity? . . .Nevertheless a thought that I never doubted guided me: that if I am, then Ihave the eloquence of a fact, something which is . . . in and of itself, that I was, Ihad the right to speak and this voice had the right to be heard.It was then that I looked at that entire inadequacy of Polish expression inliterature from another vantage point. This is what appeared to me.This literature surely did not re-create reality—even though it was reality,even in its very powerlessness. Imagine an author who sets out to write a play, forexample. If he isn’t in the position to afford the appropriate honesty, spiritualdoggedness, his work will be a mere pile of aborted words. This play, howeverunimportant and undramatic as a work, will, nevertheless, be a real play insofar asit is a testimony of defeat and the author, worthy of derision as an author, will,nevertheless, be deserving of sympathy and maybe is even great and dramatic as aman who could not ﬁnd a way of expressing himself.Poland’s real reality, therefore, did not express itself in books, which werenot of it—they were next to it—but in the fact that books did not express us. Our exis-tence was dependent on the fact that we did not have an existence adequately crys-tallized. Our form consisted of its inappropriateness to us. So where had Polish writ-ers made their mistake? In trying to be that which they could not be—formedindividuals, when instead they were people in the process of being formed . . . andthat they desired, in poetry and prose, to pull themselves up to the level of the Euro-pean, more crystallized nations, regardless of the fact that this condemned them toeverlasting inferiority—as they could not compete with that more polished form.1955207Therefore it seemed paradoxical to me that the only means by which I, aPole, could become a fully valuable phenomenon in culture, was this one: not tohide my immaturity, but to admit it; and with this admission to break away from it;and to make a steed out of the tiger that was devouring me up to now, which steed(if I could mount it) could take me farther than those Western folks who were‘‘delineated.’’ . . . At ﬁrst glance, this does not look threatening as a program orrallying cry—behold, one more caprice of the intellect, seeking ways out . . . butwhen I penetrated its consequences (while writing Ferdydurke), I distinctly noticedtheir devastating perversity. What did this mean? One simply had to turn every-thing upside down, beginning with the Poles themselves. To turn the complacent,preening Pole, so enamoured of himself, into a creature equally aware of its inade-quacy and ephemerality—and turn this keenness of vision, this ruthlessness in notconcealing weaknesses into a strength. Not only would our approach to history andnational art have to undergo annihilation, but our entire notion of patriotismwould get transformed at its base. More, a lot more, our entire attitude toward theworld would have to change and our assignment then would no longer be workingout some sort of speciﬁc Polish form, but the acquisition of a new approach to formas something that is endlessly created by people and never satisﬁes them. Inaddition: one has to demonstrate that everyone is like us, that is, one has to revealthe complete inadequacy of the civilized man in the face of the culture which istoo much for him.It was a matter of no less than exchanging a man who had form for a man(this also pertains to a nation) who produces form—a dry recipe, but one thatsuddenly and unexpectedly changes the entire Polish way of being in the world. Asfor me, I did not concern myself with the mad enormity of this revolution. Eventoday I do not ask if it is pertinent to suggest something like this in Polish culturewhich, decimated and made to heel, is pulled in exactly the opposite direction (fordialectic thought in totalitarian practice changes into dogmatic thought). Theprograms did not frighten me because a program did not move me but an innerneed did. An artist is not here to reason, he is not here to arrange syllogisms, heexists to create a picture of the world. He does not refer to someone else’s reason,only to someone else’s intuition. He describes the world as he feels it and expectsthat the audience will feel it in the same way and will say: yes, that’s it, that is realityand it is more real than that which I have been calling reality up to now—even208Volume 1though perhaps both, the artist and the audience, would not know how to provelogically why this is more real. For me it was enough that a breath of authentic lifesuddenly refreshed me at this very thought. I strove in this direction blindly simplybecause each step made my word stronger and my art more real. I did not concernmyself with all the rest. The rest—sooner or later—will create itself.
Monday
I must really call Pla.Why haven’t I called Pla yet?I forgot to call Pla again today.Tomorrow before one I will call Pla for sure.Pla is home only between 12 and 1. Not to forget tomorrow.I called but the phone was busy.I called but Pla had just left (earlier the phone was busy).I called but a child answered and I couldn’t make myself understood.I wanted to call but just at that moment Christina called.I have to call Pla.Why haven’t I called Pla yet?2091956
XVIII(Mar del Plata)
Saturday
I merely grazed Buenos Aires on my way south. I was supposed to go to Du´ s Jankowski’s estancia, near Necochea, but Odyniec sat me in an automobile anddrove me to Mar del Plata. After eight hours on the road—the city; then all of asudden from the side, from the left side, seen from a hill, the ocean. We suddenlyenter a street and ﬁnally the quinta. This is familiar. The great rustling trees of agarden, dogs, and cacti. An orchard. Almost country.
Tuesday
The Spaniard with whom we ate supper yesterday. An older man, undulypolite. That politeness is like a net that one throws on people in order to bind andcapture them. He is so polite one cannot defend oneself against it. Politeness likethe tentacles of a cruel and gluttonous Medusa.I am alone on the estate. Odyniec has left. Formoza (so-called because shewas born on the ship Formoza), the gardener’s wife, cooks and cleans.
Wednesday
I am alone in this Jocaral (that is what the quinta is called).I get up at nine. After breakfast I write until twelve. Dinner. I head for the210Volume 1beach, and return at seven. I write. Supper. I write. Then I read Dumas’s Levicomte de Bragelonne and Simone Weil’s La pesanteur et la grâce. I fall asleep.The season has just begun. Pretty empty. Wind, wind, and more wind. Inthe morning the rustling trees that encircle the quinta break into my waking andthe ﬁckle winds, from the north, south, east will not be silent, the ocean gleamsgreen, slamming white and salty into granite cliffs, the foam explodes on the sands,the uninterrupted invasion of menacing, rising, roiling heaps of water, not a mo-ment’s respite and a booming roar so vast it changes into silence. Silence. Thismadness is peace. The line of the horizon is motionless. The motionless glitter ofan endless plane. Movement immobilized, passion of eternity . . .I wandered somewhere beyond the port, along wild beaches, beyond PuntaMogotes, where there were whole ﬂocks of seagulls, veering into the wind, strain-ing, succumbing to sudden upswings at reeling heights from where, in slanted andbeautiful line, unity of chaos and ﬂight, they drop and roll over the surface of thewater. I watch for hours awestruck, stupeﬁed.On my way here I had hoped that the ocean would cleanse me of myanxieties and that the state of siege in me since Milo would subside. But the windshave merely stunned my fears. In the evening, I return from the thundering shoreto the desperately rustling garden, I open the empty house with a key, I turn on thelight and eat a cold supper, prepared by Formoza, and then . . . What? I sit downand ‘‘explode,’’ my drama explodes, my fate, my destiny, the indistinctness of myexistence. . . . Everything surrounds me. My gradual departure from nature andalso from people in recent years, the process of getting older makes these spiritualstates more and more terrifying. Man’s life becomes, with time, a steel trap. At thebeginning, softness and ﬂexibility, this is easy to wade into, but now the soft palm oflife becomes ironclad, the unrelenting coldness of metal and the horrifying crueltyof hardening arteries.I have known about this for a long time. Yet I never took it seriously as I wasconvinced that I would be changing along with my destiny; I assumed that with theyears, I would become someone else, capable of handling the situation in itsgrowing horror. I did not prepare any feelings for this time of my existence, believ-ing that they would arise in me by themselves, at the right moment. Yet to this day,there aren’t any. Only I am here and how little altered, except that now all thedoors have been shut in my face.1956211I carry this thought out of the house to the shore, I lead it around on thesand, trying to lose it in the movement of air and water, but it is here that I see theawfulness that has come to fruition in me. For if these spaces liberated me earlier,today they imprison me, yes, even space has become conﬁning and I walk alongthe shore as if I were someone pressed against a wall. This awareness: that I havealready become myself. I already am. Witold Gombrowicz, these two words, whichI carried on myself, are now accomplished. I am. I am too much. And even thoughI could still do something unpredictable for myself, I no longer want to. I can’twant because I am too much. Amid this indelineation, changeability, ﬂuidity,under the ungraspable sky I am made, ﬁnished, delineated. . . . I am and I am somuch that this casts me beyond the limits of nature.
Thursday
I went beyond Torreón, which shields from the wind. I sat there a whileand then went to Playa Grande. I lay there, almost all alone, the great anger of thesea, the din, roar, hollow bursts. Returning, I could barely move against the wind,which choked, penetrated, and tossed. The beauty of the bays, mighty cliffs, clus-ters of colored houses looking down from staggered heights on the slopes, the goldof sunny beaches.When I returned to Jocaral in the dark, the trees howled as if their skin werebeing torn off. I sat down to write this diary. I do not want loneliness crawling allover me senselessly, I need people, a reader. Not in order for us to understand oneanother. Just to give a sign of life. Today I acquiesce to all the lies, conventions, thestylization of my diary, if only to smuggle the distant echo, the feeble taste of myimprisoned I.I have already mentioned that besides Dumas, I am reading La pesanteur etla grâce. Mandatory reading. I have to write about it for an Argentine weekly. Thiswoman is too strong for me to be able to push her away, especially now, in thisinternal tug-of-war, where I am completely at the mercy of the elements. Throughher growing presence here before me grows the presence of her God. I say ‘‘throughher presence’’ because an abstract God is Greek to me. We, the grandchildren ofKierkegaard, can no longer digest the reasoned God of Aristotle, Aquinas, Des-cartes, or Kant. My generation’s relationship with abstraction is completely in ruins212Volume 1or, rather, has coarsened because we evidence a completely peasant distrust of itand, from the heights of the twentieth century, all of metaphysical dialectics appearsto me to be the same thing it was to the simple-souled gentry of the past whoconsidered Kant a swindler. How much one has to endure to come to the sameconclusion but on a higher rung of development.And even today, when my life has become, as I have said, ironclad? Life inits very monstrousness pushes me in the direction of metaphysics. Wind, trees,noise, house, all of this has stopped being ‘‘natural’’ because I myself am no longernature but something gradually cast beyond its limits. It is not I myself, but thatwhich is coming to an end in me that clamors for God, this need or necessity is notin me, but in my predicament. I look at Simone Weil and my question is not: doesGod exist? I look at her with amazement and say: how, by means of what magic,has this woman been able to arrange herself internally so that she is able to copewith what devastates me? I feel the God locked in this life as a power that is purelyhuman, connected to no supraterrestrial realm, a God that she created in herselfwith her own might. Pure ﬁction. Yet if it makes dying easier . . .It has always amazed me that lives exist based on principles other thanmine. There is nothing more commonplace or ordinary, or perhaps even morerepulsive and vile than my existence (although I don’t feel repelled by myself or mylife). I know no, absolutely no greatness. I am a petit bourgeois promenader, whohas wandered into the Alps or Himalayas. My pen touches mighty and ultimateissues all the time, but if I have reached them, it was done while playing. . . . As aboy I climbed up into them and wandered around frivolously. A heroic existencesuch as Simone Weil’s seems to be from another planet, a pole opposite from mine:whereas I constantly elude life, she takes it on fully, elle s’engage, she is theantithesis of my desertion. Simone Weil and I are the sharpest contrast that one canimagine, two mutually exclusive interpretations, two opposing systems. And it isthis woman I confront in an empty house, at the very moment when it is so hard toescape from myself.
Saturday
Bodies, bodies, bodies . . . Today on beaches sheltered from the southerngale, where the sun warms and roasts, a multitude of bodies, the great sensuality of1956213beaches, yet as always, undercut, defeated . . . To the left and right, thighs, busts,backs, hips, the soles of girls, women, taken out of hiding, the elastic harmony ofboys. The body kills the body, however, the body takes power away from the body.This nakedness stops being a phenomenon that dissolves in its excess, the sand,sun, and air annihilate them and they are ordinary. . . . Impotence overwhelms thebeach, beauty, grace, charm. They are unimportant: they are not possessive, theyneither wound nor engage. A ﬂame that gives no heat. An unarousing body, anextinguished body. This impotence debilitated even me and I returned homewithout the least spark, powerless.Ah, my novel is on the table and again, I will have to exert myself to inject alittle ‘‘brilliance’’ into a scene that is like wet powder and won’t ignite!
Sunday
I looked at the teapot and knew that this and other teapots will be morehorrifying to me as time passes, just as everything around me. I have enoughawareness to drink this goblet of poison to its dregs, but not enough sublimity to riseabove it. Death throes in a crushing underground await me, agony without a singleray of light.To tear myself away from myself . . . but how, I ask.The issue is not in the least one of believing in God, but of falling in lovewith God. Weil is not a ‘‘believer,’’ she is in love. To me, in my life, God was nevernecessary, not for ﬁve minutes, from earliest childhood I was self-sufﬁcient. There-fore, if I now ‘‘fell in love’’ (bypassing my general inability to love), it would beunder the pressure of that heavy vault, which is lowering itself upon me. It wouldbe a shout, torn out in torment, and so, invalid. Fall in love with someone becauseone can no longer stand oneself? This is a forced love.Later, pacing the room, I thought: it is true that this state of love that Weillived is organically inaccessible to me, but perhaps it would be possible to ﬁndsome sort of analogical solution, cut to my proportions and in harmony with mynature. Is it possible for man to be incapable of extracting from himself the capac-ity to deal with what awaits him? To ﬁnd in one’s own way the higher reasons forexistence and death. To create one’s own greatness. Greatness must be hidden inme, for I am ‘‘ultimate’’ enough in all that is mine but I don’t have a key to it.214Volume 1Whereas this woman was able to liberate from her inwardness spiritual currentsand whirlpools of superhuman strength.Greatness? Greatness? O greatness, I am lousy at saying you, the word isstupid coming from my lips. My distaste for that which is great.Gustave Thibon writes about Weil:‘‘I recall a certain young worker, in whom, she discovered, or so it seemedto her, a vocation for the intellectual life and on whom she relentlessly bestowedsplendid lectures on the Upanishads. The poor girl was bored to death but did notprotest out of politeness and shyness.’’So the ‘‘poor girl was bored to death’’? This is exactly how ordinary human-ity is bored by profundity and loftiness. Just as we, through politeness, put up withwise men, holy men, heroes, religion, and philosophy. And Weil? How does sheappear against this backdrop? Almost like a madwoman, locked in a hermeticsphere, not knowing where she lived, in what she lived, without a common de-nominator with others. Uprooted. This greatness loses in contact with common-ness, immediately succumbs to a ridiculous dégringolade and what do we see? Ahysterical woman, tormenting and boring, an egotist, whose swollen and aggres-sive personality is incapable of noticing others, nor is it capable of seeing itself withthe eyes of others—a knot of tensions, torments, hallucinations, and manias, some-thing casting about in the external world, like a ﬁsh taken out of water, for the realelement of this spirit is only its own sauce. And we’re supposed to experience thismetaphysical carp in a sauce of its own making?Calm down. It bothers me that her greatness does not function appro-priately with everyone. Great with Thibon but ridiculous with the girl. And thisfragmentariness characterizes all great people, great or prominent. I would de-mand a greatness capable of withstanding each human being, in every scale,on every level, including all categories of existence, equally compelling at thetop and bottom. Only this type of spirit would be capable of winning me. Thenecessity injected into me by the universalism of my time, which wants to enlistall awareness higher and lower into the game and is no longer satisﬁed witharistocracy.1956215Tuesday
Breakfast at the Hermitage with A. and his wife, whom I met accidentally.The food smells of, forgive me, a very luxurious water closet, I don’t really knowwhy, but when I poised myself over the edge of these appetizing delicacies, in thethick distinction of waiters, I could have sworn it was a closet. But then I wanted tosleep, too. Maybe that’s why.I have often been criticized—my works and I—but almost always senselessly.You say: petty. You say: coward, deserter. In one of these, here is more woundingtruth than you can imagine. No one can imagine the boundlessness of my deser-tion. The ending of Ferdydurke is not gratuitous: ‘‘I ﬂed, my face in my hands.’’Am I not cut out for the epoch, which unfurled the banner of heroism,seriousness, and responsibility? (Weil, on the other hand, is the most perfect ex-pression of all the moralities of contemporary Europe: Catholic, Marxist, andexistentialist.)Allow me, though: there is no spiritual posture, taken consistently to theultimate, which would not be worthy of respect. There can be strength in weak-ness, determination in vacillation, consistency in inconsistency and also greatnessin what is small. Bold cowardice, softness sharp as steel, an aggressive retreat.
Wednesday
Indefatigable wind.I am suffering as much as nonphysical suffering is accessible to me—morehopelessness than pain. I would like to note: I am proud that my pains are notexcessive. This brings me closer to the average, that is, to the norm, to the mostsolid layers of life.As for God, there is no sense in dreaming of an absolute God on high, inthe former style. This God has really died for me, I will not invent such a God inmyself no matter what, there are no grounds in me for this. Yet there does exist thepossibility of God as an auxiliary means, a road-bridge to man.One could easily justify this concept of God. It is enough to accept thatman must exist within the framework of his species, that, generally speaking,nature, the nature of the world, is given to him ﬁrst of all as the nature of the216Volume 1human species, which, because of his coexistence with other people, precedes hiscoexistence with the world. Man is for man. Man is in relation to man. The mythof an absolute God, therefore, could arise because it facilitated the discovery of theother man, intimacy and union with him.Take Weil, for example. Does she want to unite with God or, through God,join other human existences? Is she in love with God, or, through God, with man?Is her resilience to death, pain, and despair born of her bond to God or people? Isthat which she calls grace not simply a state of coexistence with another humanlife? That other absolute ‘‘Thou,’’ eternal, immobile, therefore, would be nothingmore than a mask behind which hides the ephemeral human face. Sad, naive, butalso moving . . . What a jump into the heavens simply to jump two yards from one’sown I to someone else’s?If, then, faith is only a state of the soul leading to someone else’s temporaryexistence, then I should be able to attain this state even after casting off theauxiliary myth about the pre-Eternal. I really don’t know why I couldn’t prove thisto myself. I’m missing some sort of key. Perhaps God is one of the keys but theremust be a different key and one in accord with my own nature. As far as I amconcerned, my entire life, all my experiences, all my intuitions, thrust me in thisdirection, not toward God, but toward people. I could achieve the facilitation, thenormalization, so to speak, of dying only by shifting the weight of my individualdeath to others and, in general, by submitting to others.People are an awe-inspiring power for the single human being. I believe inthe superiority of a collective existence.J. told me about the hell he experienced in a German concentration campin Mauthausen. The climate of that camp, the human climate (after all, it was cre-ated by people) was such that death became easy. On his way to the gas chamber(which he avoided only by accident), he regretted not eating his morning portion ofbread. This watering down of death was not only the consequence of physicaldeprivation, it was the ‘‘spirit,’’ degrading and depreciating, that had changed.The means of our coexistence with people are unimportant to this day.The horrible isolation of animals which can barely communicate . . . but man? Wehave not yet grown so remote from animals and we haven’t the least notion of whatit means to have another human being tear into our locked self.To foresee ourselves in the future . . . what knowledge!1956217Thursday
Lefebvre on Kierkegaard:‘‘He lost his love, his ﬁancée. He implores God to return everything to himand waits. . . .’’‘‘What does Kierkegaard demand? He demands a repetition of a life whichhe had not experienced, the recovery of his lost ﬁancée.’’‘‘He clamors for a repetition of the past—that Regina be returned to him asshe was, at the time of their engagement. . . .’’How similar to The Marriage! Except that Henry doesn’t turn to God. Hedeposes his father-king (the only link joining him to God and absolute morality),after which, proclaiming himself king, he attempts to recover the past with thehelp of people. He attempts to make a new reality of and with them.Divine and human magic.Lefebvre, as all Marxists writing about existentialism, is acute in places andthen becomes entirely pedestrian, impossibly ﬂat, as if he had fallen out a windowinto the street.When will this whirlwind, this tearing, this madness of leaves, despair ofbranches, cease? When some of the trees calm down, others begin to howl, thenoise rolls from one place to another, and I, locked in this house, locked inmyself . . . and, now, at night, I really am afraid that ‘‘something’’ will appear . . .something abnormal . . . because my monstrousness is growing, my relations withnature are bad, lax, this laxness makes me open to ‘‘everything.’’ I do not mean thedevil, but ‘‘whatever’’ . . . I don’t know if this is clear. If the table stopped being atable by changing into . . . not necessarily a diabolical thing. The devil is only oneof the possibilities. Beyond nature is immensity.‘‘Finality’’ has surrounded me on all sides. This is an encirclement ripe withdread. Yet, as I have already noted with some satisfaction, I extinguish all powers inmyself. A Romantic in my circumstances would gladly surrender himself of thesefuries. An existentialist would plumb his anxieties. A believer would prostratehimself before God. A Marxist would reach the bottom of Marxism. I don’t believethat any of these serious people would deny the profundity of this experience, I, onthe other hand, do what I can to return to an everyday dimension, ordinary life,nothing too serious. I don’t want peaks and an abyss, I want the plain. . . .218Volume 1To retreat from all ‘‘ﬁnality’’ . . .I am quite at home with the manner of thinking that organizes this retreat. Isay to myself: your dying lives and even lives quite intensely. You experience deathto describe it in the most lively way, you want to use it for the remnants of yourexistence, for your literary career. You peer into the chasm in order to tell otherswhat you have seen. You seek greatness to elevate yourself above others by afraction. Before you is an abyss, but behind you is the swarming little world ofpeople. . . .Is it just I who does this? Wasn’t the entire exploration of the Unknown bythe ‘‘greatest spirits of humanity’’ done in order to become a prominent philoso-pher, poet, or saint amid ordinary everydayness? How can I explain that there is noirony in what I say, that, on the contrary, all my hopes are based on exactly this?Dialectics, ruining greatness on behalf of what is small. To attain beingaverage. To achieve the average on a higher rung, compromising all extremenessbut only after exhausting it, all on my own scale.
Friday
Polish Catholicism.I understand a Catholicism such as the one that has historically developedin Poland as the shifting of burdens beyond one’s own powers to someone else—God. This is entirely the relationship of children to their father. A child is underthe protection of the father. A child is supposed to listen to him, respect and lovehim, and abide by his commandments. A child, therefore, can remain a childbecause all ‘‘ﬁnality’’ is passed on to God the Father and his earthly embassy, theChurch. This way the Pole gained a green world, green because it is immature, butalso green because the meadows and trees blossom in it and are not black andmetaphysical. To live in the lap of nature, in a limited world, leaving the blackuniverse to God.I, who am terribly Polish and terribly rebellious against Poland, have alwaysbeen irritated by that little, childish, secondary, ordered, and religious world that isPoland. I attributed Poland’s historical lack of dynamism as well as Poland’s cul-tural impotence to these characteristics because God led us around by our littlehand. I compared this well-behaved Polish childhood to the adult independence1956219of other cultures. This nation without a philosophy, without a conscious history,intellectually soft and spiritually timid, a nation that produced only a ‘‘kindly’’ and‘‘noble-minded’’ art, a languid people of lyrical scribblers of poetry, folklorists,pianists, actors, in which even Jews dissolved and lost their venom. . . . My literarywork is guided by the desire to extricate the Pole from all secondary realities and toput him in direct confrontation with the universe. Let him fend for himself as bestas he can. I desire to ruin his childhood.But now in this pursuant din, in the face of my own helplessness, in thisinability to straighten things out, it occurs to me that I have just contradictedmyself. Ruin a childhood? In the name of what? In the name of a maturity that Imyself can neither bear nor accept? It is the Polish God, after all (in contrast toWeil’s God), who is that splendid system that has maintained man in a sphere ofindirect being, who is that veering away from the ultimate that is demanded by myinsufﬁciency. How can I desire that they not be children if I myself, per fas et nefas,want to be a child?A child, yes, but one that has come to know and has exhausted all thepossibilities of adult seriousness. This is the big difference. First, push away allthe things that make everything easier, ﬁnd yourself in a cosmos that is as bot-tomless as you can stand, in a cosmos at the limits of your consciousness, andexperience a condition where you are left to your own loneliness and your ownstrength, only then, when the abyss which you have not managed to tame throwsyou from the saddle, sit down on the earth and discover the sand and grassanew. For childhood to be allowed, one must have driven maturity to bankruptcy.I am not blufﬁng: when I pronounce the word ‘‘childhood,’’ I have the feeling thatI am expressing the deepest but not yet roused contents of the people who gaveme birth. This is not the childhood of a child, but the difﬁcult childhood ofan adult.
Saturday
Today is Christmas Eve. I leave in the morning, the day after tomorrow.The wind slackened and I strayed over the beaches in the afternoon, it gothot, but in the evening came a storm, bulbous clouds, similar to enormous saggingcannonballs, out of whose bellies crawled quick, self-shredding little clouds. All of220Volume 1this grew tight, dense, heavy, close; it froze, rippled, not a single sliver of lightning,in the darkness of the evening made darker by the darkness of the storm.Then the tormented trees crashed, having fallen into whorls of the madblows of the gale, which tossed convulsively on all sides and ﬁnally exploded in ahalf circle bristling with zigzags of lightning. The house creaked, the shuttersslammed. I wanted to put on a light, no, the lines were down. Downpour. I sit inthe ﬂashing darkness. ‘‘The heavens grew dark but they shone like a vision ofSatan’s capital.’’ Phosphorizing without end and something like errant ﬁres amongthe clouds and rolling thunderpeals, also endless. Ha, ha. I didn’t feel too sure ofmyself. As they say, what a night! C’est à ne pas mettre un chien dehors. I got up,paced the room and all of a sudden, extended my hand. I don’t know why—maybebecause, being afraid, I was, at the same time, playing with my fear. This was anunsubstantiated gesture and so it was dangerous somehow, at such a moment, inthese conditions.Then the storm stopped. Rain, wind, thunder, light—all ceased. Silence.I had never seen anything like it.The cessation of the storm at full tilt, stranger than immobilizing a horse infull gallop, this suddenness, as if someone had cut its motion. Understand this: astorm which had not exhausted itself in a natural way, but which was interrupted.An unhealthy, coagulating darkness, some kind of illness, something pathologicalin space. I, of course, had not gone so crazy that I thought the movement of myhand had stopped the storm. Out of curiosity, I extended my hand again in the nowentirely dark room and what should happen? The gale, rain, thunderclaps, it allbegan again!I did not extend my hand a third time. I apologize. I did not dare extend myhand a third time and to this day, my hand has remained ‘‘unextended,’’ scarred bythis disgrace. No joke, what poverty! What a compromising situation! I, who amnot, after all, a hysterical man or a half-wit! Then how did it happen that, after allthe centuries of development, progress, science, I, not for frivolous reasons, butfrom a serious, solid fear, did not dare extend my hand out into the night, suspect-ing that ‘‘ah, perhaps’’ it governs the storm? Am I a sober, modern man? Yes. Am Iaware, educated, well oriented? Yes, yes. Am I familiar with the latest attainmentsof philosophy and all the truths of the current day? Why, yes, of course! Yet how in1956221the devil am I supposed to know, be certain, be guaranteed that my hand isincapable of starting or stopping a storm with one magic gesture?Why, everything I know about my nature and the nature of the world isincomplete—it is as if I knew nothing at all.
XIX(La Cabania)
Tuesday
Yesterday morning I took a bus via Necochea to W™adys™aw Jankowski’sestancia, called La Cabania.If this diary, written for the past few years, is not up to my level or that of myart or epoch, no one should blame me because this is work imposed on me by thecircumstances of my exile, for which I may not be suited.I arrived at La Cabania at seven in the evening.‘‘Du´s’’ Jankowski and his daughters, Marisa and Andrea, Mr. and Mrs.Stanis™aw Czapski (Joseph’s brother), their daughter Lena, and Andrzej Czapskiand his wife. Supper, during which I made faces with one side of my face at thegirls, who giggled.A spacious room in a quiet guest house in the garden, where I arranged mypapers in preparation for a ﬁnal bout with them. Who has decreed that one shouldwrite only when one has something to write? Why, art consists of writing not whatone has to say, but something altogether unexpected.
Saturday
There is no ocean, gleaming, salt, winds. After that storm there in Jocaral,here, peace. Quiet and relaxation. The most important thing is that the lonelinesshas left me. In the evening, by lamplight, a family atmosphere that I have notknown for sixteen years. I take walks in the pampa, which is gigantically pastel, as222Volume 1always, but reined in by avenues of eucalyptus and bouquets of trees. In the dis-tance a mountain range.What always amazes me in the Argentine countryside: there are no peas-ants, there are no farmhands. In spaces that would demand many many hands inPoland, there is no one. One man plows with a tractor. The same man reaps,threshes, and even packs the grain into sacks, moving along the ﬁeld in a motor-ized harvester, which is also a threshing machine. Those working these ﬁelds andtending the great numbers of cattle and horses come to a total of a few peons, whoare never in a hurry. What a relief after that brutal countryside, where a man had tobe a master to a yokel.Existentialism.I would like to bring my anxieties at Mar del Plata to some sort of conclu-sion. I have to write certain things down so that they become more binding.
Monday
Existentialism.I don’t know how existentialism would be able to become something morethan a toy in my hands, and change into seriousness, death, doing oneself in. Iwrite down my opinion of existentialism here not out of respect for my owndilettante’s opinions, but out of respect for my own life. Describing, as best as I can,my spiritual adventures (as if I were describing my corporeal adventures), I cannotbypass two bankruptcies which have occurred in me: the existential and the Marx-ist. I conﬁrmed the crash of existential theory in myself not long ago by discussingit during my little course in philosophy . . . contre coeur, as something already dead.I wrote Ferdydurke in the years 1936–37, when no one knew anything aboutthis philosophy. In spite of this, Ferdydurke is existential to the marrow. Critics, I willhelp you in determining why Ferdydurke is existential: because man is created bypeople and because people mutually form themselves. This is precisely existenceand not essence. Ferdydurke is existence in a vacuum, that is, nothing exceptexistence. That is why, in this book practically all the basic themes of existentialismplay fortissimo: becoming, creating oneself, freedom, fear, absurdity, nothingness. . . with the single difference that in addition to the typical existential ‘‘spheres’’ ofhuman life, like Heidegger’s banal and authentic life, Kierkegaard’s aesthetic, ethi-1956223cal, and religious life, or Jaspers’s ‘‘spheres,’’ there is yet another sphere, namely, the‘‘sphere of immaturity.’’ This sphere or ‘‘category’’ is the contribution of my privateexistence to existentialism. Let us say it right off: this is what separates me the mostfrom classical existentialism. For Kierkegaard, Heidegger, and Sartre, the moreprofound the awareness, the more authentic the existence. They measure honestyand the essence of experience by the degree of awareness. But is our humanity reallybuilt on awareness? Doesn’t awareness—that forced, extreme awareness—ariseamong us, not from us, as something created by effort, the mutual perfecting ofourselves in it, the conﬁrming of something that one philosopher forces ontoanother? Isn’t man, therefore, in this private reality, something childish and alwaysbeneath his own awareness? And doesn’t he feel awareness to be, at the same time,something alien, imposed and unimportant? If this is how it is, this furtive child-hood, this concealed degradation are ready to explode your systems sooner or later.It is not worth carrying on about Ferdydurke, which is a circus and not aphilosophy. It remains a fact, however, that even before the war, I was like a catwalking my own paths through existentialism. Why, then, when I became familiarwith the theory later on, was it of no use to me at all? And why, now, when myexistence grows more monstrous with each year, so very mixed with dying, andbeckons me, forces me to seriousness, why is their seriousness of no use to me at all?I might forgive those professors the twisting intestines of their thinkingwhich does not want to be thinking, their leaps from logic into alogic, from abstrac-tion into the concrete and vice versa. Their thought, that retching thought, really is‘‘that which is not and is not that which it is’’—that is how deeply their splittingcontradictions penetrate. A self-destructive thought, which creates the impressionthat we are using our hands to cut off our hands. Their works are one cry of desperateimpotence, the most artful expression of failure, and it is here that beating one’shead against the wall becomes the only remaining method. Yet I might forgive themthis, this might even suit me. I might even be able to handle the purely professionalreproaches put to them by their colleagues, concerning, for example, the relationsubject-object or their being handicapped by classical idealism or their illicit ties toHusserl. Perhaps I have already become accustomed to the thought that philosophyhas to be a failure and I know that we can only dispense thought that has beendashed to pieces, after all, we know that a rider who mounts this horse, has to fall off.No, I am not demanding. I am not asking for absolute answers to absolute questions.224Volume 1I would be happy in my poverty with even a dialectical scrap of truth, which wouldcheat this hunger for even a moment. Yes, if this could satisfy me even temporarily, Iwould not refuse even this regurgitated nourishment.I would be satisﬁed all the more easily since, I have to admit, even thoughthis philosophy is bankrupt in its very points of departure, nevertheless, it canbecome immensely fertile and enriching as an attempt to systematize our pro-foundest knowledge about man. After discarding this speciﬁc scholasticism thatspeculates in the abstract (this is what existentialism hates, but what it thrives on),something very important, something concretely, practically important remains: acertain construct of man, resulting from the profoundest, most authentic con-frontation possible between consciousness and existence. The various theses of theexistentialists will perhaps turn out to be a professorial ranting, but the existentialman, such as they saw him, will remain the great acquisition of consciousness.This is certainly an abysmal model. Falling into this abyss, I know that I will notreach the bottom, but nevertheless it is not alien, it is the abyss of my nature. Andperhaps this metaphysics of man and life will lead to nothing. It is, nevertheless, anunavoidable necessity in our development, something without which we could notreach a certain maximum of ours, that highest and most profound effort that mustbe attained. So many of the loose intuitions that are so abundant in the air webreathe that they visited me almost daily are here woven into a system, organizedinto a whole that is desperately lame and barely alive, but some sort of whole,nevertheless. Existentialism, whatever else it may be, is founded on our essentialanxiety. It liberates our metaphysical dernier cri. It hones the ultimate half-truthabout us to such a degree that Heidegger’s or Jaspers’s man must replace the otheranachronistic models and it imposes itself on the imagination and delineates ourframe of mind in the cosmos. Here, therefore, existentialism becomes a dread andproud power, along the lines of those great acts of self-delineation, which every sooften model the face of humanity. The only question is: How long will this lastmodel sufﬁce? Our tempo is accelerated, resulting in lighter and more ﬂeetingdeﬁnitions.My relationship with existentialism is tormentingly unclear and tense. Itintrudes into my existence, but I don’t want it. And it is not I who am in thispredicament. Strange. Philosophy, exhorting to authenticity, leads us into giganticfalsehoods.1956225Tuesday
We told each other our dreams. Nothing in art, even the most inspiredmysteries of music, can equal dreams. The artistic perfection of dreams! Howmany lessons this nocturnal archmaster gives to us, the daily fabricators of dreams,the artists! In a dream everything is pregnant with a dreadful and unﬁnishedmeaning, nothing is indifferent, everything reaches us more deeply, more inti-mately than the most heated passion of the day. This is the lesson: an artist cannotbe restricted to day, he has to reach the night life of humanity and seek its mythsand symbols. Also: the dream upsets the reality of the experienced day and extractscertain fragments from it, strange fragments, and arranges them illogically in anarbitrary pattern. It is exactly this lack of sense that has the profoundest meaning forus: we ask why, in the name of what, is our ordinary sense destroyed. Gazing at theabsurd as at a hieroglyph, we try to decipher its reason for being, of which we knowonly that it is, that it exists. . . . Art, therefore, also can and should upset reality, takeit apart into elements, build illogical new worlds of it and in this arbitrariness ishidden a law, which in disturbing sense has it, so that the madness that destroys ourexternal sense leads us into our internal meaning. The dream reveals the abysmalidiocy of the task set for art by those classical minds that prescribe that art ought tobe ‘‘clear.’’ Clarity? Its clarity is the clarity of night, not day. Its brightness is exactlylike that of a ﬂashlight that extracts just one object out of the darkness, immersingthe rest in an even more bottomless night. It should be, beyond the boundaries ofits light, dark like the pronouncements of the Pythia, veiled, not spelled out,shimmering with a multiplicity of meanings and broader than precision. A classi-cal clarity? The clarity of the Greeks? If this seems clear to you then it is becauseyou are blind. Go at high noon to take a good look at the most classical Venus, andyou will see the darkest night.
Monday
Dus’s new poem which came to him this morning—in a dream or half-drowse:
Twisting his mouth into a crystalline wordThe wise man said to the fool, you are absurd226Volume 1And the fool replied with the smile of a swineHowever it looks, whatever sense is mine
This is one of those sleepy, unremarkable poems. It begins like a triﬂe, but inthe last line there is an unraveling, nonsense intrudes to save the rhyme and to main-tain the appearance of sense. This little doggerel is like a solemn drunk who beginson topic but ends with gibberish, pretending cleverly before himself and others thatthe point he is making is excellent! The fact, however, that the fool answers ‘‘withthe smile of a swine,’’ stupidly really, with porcine clumsiness, with gross piggish-ness, with the haughty carelessness of an idiot—isn’t this a point actually worthy ofattention? This swine delights in his stupidity—this is his justiﬁcation.This is the poetry of the tawdry, of delight in bungling. I have always beendrawn to this kind of mucking around and who knows if I did not miss my callingby veering from this swinish path. (In The Marriage and also in my story ‘‘Incidentson the H.M.S. Banbury’’ there is no lack of that drunkenness, but I should proba-bly increase the portion).Everything that is torpid astounds and excites me.
Thursday
How should I explain why existentialism did not lead me astray?Perhaps I was close to choosing an existence, which they call authentic—incontrast to a frivolous temporal life, which they call banal. That is how great thepressure of seriousness is from all sides. Today, in today’s raw times, there is nothought or art which does not shout to you in a loud voice: don’t escape, don’t play,don’t poke fun at yourself, don’t run away! Fine. I, too, in spite of everything, wouldalso prefer not to lie to my own being. I, therefore, tried this authentic life, full ofloyalty to existence in myself. But what do you want? It can’t be done. It can’t bedone because that authenticity turned out to be falser than all my previous decep-tions, games, and leaps taken together. I, with my artistic temperament, don’tunderstand much theory, but I do have a nose when it comes to style. When Iapplied maximum consciousness to life, in an attempt to found my existence onthis, I noticed that something stupid was happening to me. Too bad, but no way. Itcan’t be done. It seems impossible to meet the demands of Dasein and simulta-neously have coffee and croissants for an evening snack. To fear nothingness, but to1956227fear the dentist more. To be consciousness, which walks around in pants and talkson the telephone. To be responsibility, which runs little shopping errands down-town. To bear the weight of signiﬁcant being, to instill the world with meaning andthen return the change from ten pesos. What do you want? I know how thesecontrasts come together in their theories. Slowly, gradually, from Descartes throughGerman idealism, I grew accustomed to their structure, but laughter and shame tossme about at the sight of it with equal strength, as in the ﬁrst days, when I was stillcompletely naive. And even if you were to ‘‘convince’’ me a thousand times over,there would still always be some elementary, unbearable ridiculousness in this!This is impossible to bear, especially in existentialism. As long as philosophyspeculated in isolation from life, as long as it was pure reason reeling off abstrac-tions, it was not violence, affront, and ridiculousness to such a degree. Thoughtsimply was, life simply was. I could tolerate Cartesian or Kantian speculationsbecause they were only the work of the mind. I, on the other hand, sensed thatbeyond consciousness is being. I felt elusive in being. Basically I never treated thesedifferently than as an exclusive creation of a certain power of mine, the power ofreasoning, which, however, was only one of my functions, which was, in an ultimatesense, an expansion of my vitality. And so, because of this, I did not have to sur-render. But now? Existentialism? Existentialism wants to get at all of me, it no longerappeals only to my cognitive powers, it wants to penetrate me in my deepest exis-tence, it wants to be my existence. Here, therefore, my life bolts and begins to kick.Intellectual polemics with existentialists really amuse me. How can you polemicizewith something that strikes at your being? This is no longer just a theory, but arapacious act of their existence in relation to your existence and one does not answerthis with arguments but with living differently than they would like you to and socategorically differently that your life becomes impenetrable to them.Historically speaking, the plunge of the human spirit into this existentialscandal, into its speciﬁc helpless rapacity and wise stupidity, was probably inevita-ble. The history of culture indicates that stupidity is the twin sister of reason, it growsmost luxuriously not on the soil of virgin ignorance, but on soil cultivated by thesweat of doctors and professors. Great absurdities are not thought up by those whosereason hovers over daily affairs. It is not strange, therefore, that the most intensethinkers were the producers of the greatest idiocies. Reason is a machine thatpuriﬁes itself dialectically, but this means that dirt is appropriate to it. Our rescue228Volume 1from this dirty imperfection of reason was that no one has ever taken reason tooseriously—beginning with the philosophers themselves. As for me, I can’t believethat Socrates, Spinoza, or Kant were real people and completely serious ones at that.I claim that an excess of seriousness is conditioned by an excess of frivolity. Of whatwere these majestic conceptions born? Curiosity? Accident? Ambition? Gain? Forpleasure? We will never know the dirt of their genesis, their hidden, intimateimmaturity, their childhood or shame because even the artists themselves are notallowed to know about this. . . . We will not know the roads by which Kant-the-childand Kant-the-adolescent changed into Kant-the-philosopher, but it would be goodto remember that culture or knowledge is something much lighter than one wouldimagine. Lighter and more ambivalent. Nevertheless, the imperialism of reason ishorrible. Whenever reason notices that some part of reality eludes it, it immediatelylunges at it to devour it. From Aristotle to Descartes, reason behaved calmly for themost part because it judged that everything could be understood. Beginning withthe Critique of Pure Reason, however, and then Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Kierke-gaard, and others, it began to delineate terrain inaccessible to thinking and todiscover that life ridicules reason. This, reason could not bear and from then on, itstorments, which reach tragicomic heights in existentialism, begin.It is here that reason meets, face-to-face, the greatest and most elusive ofsneerers, life. Reason discovered and made that enemy concrete, one could say thatthey thought long and hard until they thought up something about which theycould no longer think. That is why one is overwhelmed with shame in the face of thecreations of this freak reasoning: here, as if by the strength of some sort of malicious-ness, repulsive perversion, and greatness in a demonic twist, reason becomes a greatridiculousness, profundity leads to the dregs of impotence, accuracy strikes atstupidity and the absurd. Horriﬁed, we see that the more seriousness, the lessserious! This did not happen to us to this extent with other philosophers. They grewcloser to ridiculousness in proportion to their penetration into the terrain of life and,in this way, Nietzsche is more comical than Kant. Yet laughter was not yet anecessity when regarding them, for this thought was isolated, at least to a point, andit did not engage us. It was only when the theoretical problem became a ‘‘mystery’’ ofGabriel Marcel that the mystery turned out to be ridiculous to the bursting point!Let us attempt to delineate the nature of this ridiculousness. It is not just amatter of this desperate contrast between an ‘‘ordinary reality’’ and their ultimate1956229reality, a contrast so massive and devastating that no analyses can patch it up. Ourlaughter in this is not only laughter planted with both feet in ‘‘common sense,’’ no,it is worse because it is more spasmodic, it is independent of us. When you,existentialists, speak to me of consciousness, fear, and nothingness, I burst withlaughter not because I don’t agree with you, but because I must agree with you. Iagreed and, lo and behold, nothing happened. I agreed but nothing changed inme, even by an iota. The consciousness that you injected into my life entered mybloodstream and instantly became the life that now shakes me in spasms of giggles,the ancient triumph of the element. Why am I forced to laugh? Simply because Ialso revel in consciousness. I laugh because I delight in fear, play with nothing-ness, and toy with responsibility. Death does not exist.
Tuesday
In spite of this I have to say that I do not believe that any culture, art, orliterature can afford to bypass existentialism. If Polish Catholicism, or, too, PolishMarxism, fence themselves off from existentialism with an unwise disregard, theywill become a blind alley, a provincial backwater.On Sunday, Du´ s and I drove out into the neighborhood to visit.The lady of the house, an Englishwoman (and the wife of a wealthy stock-broker from Buenos Aires, who bought a small parcel of land here and on it built achalet) treated me right off with a strange aggressiveness, which was all the moreunusual as I was a complete stranger to her. You, sir, must be an egotist. I smell theegotist in you! . . . After which she does not stop letting me know something moreor less like this: You imagine that you are someone, but I know better! You are apseudointellectual, a pseudoartist (if you were worth something, you would befamous!), which is to say, you are a parasite, a drone, a theoretician, a lunatic,anarchist, a tramp, and, certainly, a swaggerer! You must work! Live for society! Iwork, I sacriﬁce myself, I live for others, but you are a sybarite and a Narcissus!To those ‘‘I’s’’ with which she destroys my egotism, I add another few: I aman Englishwoman! I am distinguished! Look how honest I am and casually imper-tinent! I have grace! I am charming, amusing, aesthetic, and also, moral! I have myown mind! Not just anyone appeals to me!Once, Sabato or Mastronardi, I no longer remember which, told me that at230Volume 1a certain party, an estanciero (a person otherwise well brought up) walked up to awell-known Argentine writer and said: You, Sir, are a numbskull! When asked whatspeciﬁcally in the writing of this particular author aroused such abomination inhim, he admitted that he had never read him and had upbraided him por lasdudas, just in case, so that he would not think ‘‘too highly of himself.’’This phenomenon has its name here. It is called the ‘‘Argentine defensive.’’The defensive of this lady, who was rather likable although a bit mannered, was notserious because one could see that she wanted to be appealing and that she wieldsthis genre because she considers it charming and distinguished. Sometimes, how-ever, an Argentine becomes truly discourteous in a defensive, a rare thing in thispolite country.
Monday
I feel that there is no way to ignore existentialism or to bypass it with anykind of dialectic. I believe that the artist or writer who has not come face-to-facewith its initiations hasn’t the slightest notion about the current day (Marxism willnot save him). I also believe that the lack of this experience, the existential experi-ence, in Polish culture, which is bound ﬁrmly between the frameworks of Catholi-cism and Marxism, will once again retard it in relation to the West, by some ﬁfty toa hundred years.One cannot leap over existentialism, one must vanquish it. Yet one will notvanquish it with discussion because it does not lend itself well to discussion. It isnot, after all, an intellectual issue. Existentialism will be overcome only by thepassionate and categorical choice of another life, another reality. By choosing thisother reality, we become that reality. Generally speaking, in the future, we shouldbid farewell to the methods of ‘‘objective’’ discussion, persuasion, and argumenta-tion. We will not untie our Gordian knots with our intellect. We will cut throughthem with our own lives.I resist the theoretical and systematic existentialism of philosophers be-cause the world from which it issues is opposed to my life, it does not ﬁt my life. Tome, existentialists are dishonest people: this feeling is stronger than reason. Noticethat I am not doubting their avenues of thought or the intuition by which theyarrived at this doctrine. I am disregarding it because of its results, which, as exis-1956231tence, I cannot come to terms with or assimilate in any way. I say, therefore, that itis not for me and I push it away. At the instant that I dispose of their existential nightof the single consciousness by passionate decision, I return a normal, concreteworld to life and this is the world in which I can breathe. The point here is not at allto prove that this world is the most real reality. The point is the blind, stubbornafﬁrmation of the temporal world in spite of that intuition, as the only thing inwhich life is possible, as the only thing which is compatible with our nature.We must be aware of existentialism just as we had to make ourselves awareof Nietzsche or Hegel. What’s more, we have to extract everything we can fromthis—all conceivable depth and wealth. Yet we cannot believe it. Of course, weshould wield this knowledge for it is the best knowledge we can attain, neverthe-less, he who believes in it is grotesquely stiff, inertly ponderous, awkward andclumsy! Let us retain this awareness on a remoter plain, as an auxiliary device.Even though existentialism may blind us with ﬂashes of the highest revelation, wehave to disregard it. We should treat it with disdain. This is no place for loyalty.
Wednesday
A letter from J. Kempka in Munich. I cite passages from Zbigniew Mitz-ner’s introduction to the new edition of Uni™owski’s Twenty Years of Life, publishedin Poland.‘‘When Uni™owski appeared on the literary scene, a ruthless cult, divorcingliterature from life, opposed progressive tendencies. This was the period whenGombrowicz wanted to show Polish literature its ‘backside,’ and exerted, unfortu-nately, a broad inﬂuence on his contemporaries with his writing about childish-ness and the subconscious.’’‘‘In his novel, whose title itself constituted a program (the word Ferdydurkemeans nothing), he wanted to reduce human life to childish reﬂexes. Uni™owskiwanted to show the development and maturation of a child in a severe and evilworld. Gombrowicz did the reverse: he wanted to reduce the issues of life andsocial questions to the epoch of childhood into the sphere of subconscious re-ﬂexes. . . . Uni™owski was a writer heading in the opposite direction from Gombro-wicz and his adherents. . . .’’Is Mitzner ordinarily and simplemindedly stupid? Or does the regime force232Volume 1him into stupidity? Or perhaps Mitzner is smart, but he backsides and blunts me inorder to destroy me all the more easily? People! Cut my throat if you are told to, butnot with such a dull, such a terribly dull, knife!Let me add, from the treasury of my memories, that when I gave Uni™owskiFerdydurke—still in typescript—to read, he was bowled over with delight. He didnot conceal the fact that this work affected him in a liberating way. In gratitude, heinvited me to the Adria and got me drunk.Together with this letter came a clipping from Dzi´ s i Jutro.* A lengthy article by Zygmunt Lichniak entitled, ‘‘Looking Askance But Not Cross-Eyed.’’The subject is émigré literature, but most of the ammunition is ﬁred at Mi™osz andmyself. I appear as an ‘‘anarchist’’ who acknowledges no law.‘‘That decent fellow,’’ as A. N. rightly remarked in Kultura, when discuss-ing another one of Lichniak’s statements about me. ‘‘That decent asinine fellow,’’ Icould add. Nietzsche asked: ‘‘Can a donkey be tragic?’’ Yes, when it staggersbeneath a load it cannot bear.There is something low in this coziness of theirs toward their fate, their‘‘decency,’’ their ‘‘goodness,’’ their very speciﬁc virtuousness. . . . This is interesting.It would seem that there one lives keenly. In the meantime, these souls are likewarm dumplings, these books and articles reek of a disintegrating softness, whichwas formerly characteristic of a provincial backwater. Their softness is not false, noris it merely a consequence of the fact that sharper elements are removed fromparticipation. The law is such that when collective life becomes everything, theindividual becomes ﬂaccid. I fear that quite a few of the builders of the newPoland—and I say this from a personal, spiritual, and intellectual perspective—area pulp, baby food, stewed fruit.In addition to the above clippings, two bulletins of the radio station ‘‘Home-land,’’ published in Warsaw, where there is also mention of me. The same sincerity,mixed with lies, but also blurred and almost innocent in its dull-wittedness. Theycite a few sentences out of context, twist the meaning, and sprinkle everything withcommentary. Even the Vice-Premier Cyrankiewicz extracted little sentences frommy diary in order to shake them in front of the nation and shout: monstrosity!Almighty God, remove us some day from this absurdity!
*Today and Tomorrow.1956233XX(La Cabania)
Wednesday
‘‘The Novel’’ (it is difﬁcult to call my works novels) does not go well. Itslanguage, which is too stiff, paralyzes me. I dread that everything that I havewritten up to now—about a hundred pages—is awful tripe. I am not in a position tojudge this because in my long coexistence with the text, I lose all sense of it, but Iam afraid . . . that something is warning me. . . . Will I, therefore, have to throweverything into the trash can, several months’ work, to begin from the beginning?My God! And what if I have lost my ‘‘talent’’ and will never write anything,anything, at least, on the level of my former works?France: talent is only great patience. Gide: Talent is fear of failure. If talentis patience and fear, I do not lack talent.I have thought up a captivating, stimulating theme, reality loaded with hor-rible revelations and the work is at the boiling point, stimulated by many ideas, andnumerous visions and intuitions. Yet I have to write all this. My language deceivesme. I have entered a category of words that are too calm, that are not mad enough.Girls:Marisa, ﬁfteen, distinguished and romantic, lazy in her studies, but be-cause of this, endlessly drowning in a luminous vapor of beauty, love, art. . . . I tellher about myself and Lollobrigida or about myself and Grace Kelly, setting thestory on yachts, near waterfalls, or on mountain peaks. Distrustful.Andrea, a pert, talented, and sharp girl, twelve years old, a giggler withwhom I like to giggle, specializes in stealing my pipe. I tell her that one of thewindows of the stable is ‘‘bad’’ and that one must be careful, which disturbs hersleep and mine.Lena, fourteen years old. This one I have engaged in a light ﬂirtation,which consists of looks expressing contempt, intoxication, rapture, condescension,desire, cynicism, indifference, sarcasm, love, madness, irony, boredom, indiffer-ence. . . . When the adults don’t see us, we also communicate by making faces.After all, she despises me.234Volume 1Blondes! How beautiful! The delicacy and stillness of their blossoming.They are but it is as if they did not exist. They are temporary, in love with them-selves and despising themselves, important and unimportant, their ascending exis-tence is both a joke and seriousness. I, on the other hand, being somewhat older,must submit to their amusement with my every approach to them and I lie, lie, liebecause this is what their imagination demands. I have been false to the marrow. Itell them about my battles during the last war.
Thursday
This on one level. On another are thoughts which I could call for lack of abetter term, an effort to extract some sort of morality from myself, the morality ofmy time. Catholicism, existentialism, Marxism. I think about this while walkingalong an avenue lined with eucalyptus. I think—which amazes me—because Iusually avoid thinking. I can say with a clear conscience that I think only when Iam forced to think. I prefer to stare rather than think.But now I think much more calmly than there, in Mar del Plata, when Ireally feared dying.Am I a man deprived of a moral sense?No, deﬁnitely not. Mine is a rather noble nature, although an inexpressiblyweak one (my master in this is probably Chopin—I arrange myself so that myweakness changes into strength). At any rate, this furious, deaf, almost spasmodicrebellion, which is born in me whenever I confront baseness, does not lie. To thisday, I have preserved the simple moral reﬂex of a boy, as I have preserved so manyother things from my youth.Whence then my distaste for all delineated morality, locked into a system?Out of love for that simplicity. I want to have a relaxed morality, the morality ofmy nature, I want to preserve this freshness. For me, man is constructed in pre-cisely this, in morality, and in an inappropriate morality that is the death of allmoral life. So what? The world around me becomes more and more constructed,less and less like a rustling tree, more and more like a bathroom: repugnantcleanliness, smoothness of shiny enamel and metal, coolness and logic, pipes andfaucets over a gleaming tub. As someone has accurately observed, I believe it wasin Kultura, a bath in this tub is not a dip in a lake. Locked in this bathroom, I vomit.1956235When a modern moralist type like Sartre appears on the horizon, I have theimpression that this is a frogman rising from the depths without remembering toremove his wetsuit. The awful mask, planned for an inhuman pressure, has ad-hered to his face.
Saturday
The ethics of Marxism.I agree that Communism was born a hundredfold more from an offendedmoral sense than from a desire to improve material being. Justice! That is its cry.They cannot bear the thought that one person has a palace and another a cot. Mostof all they cannot stand the thought that one person has the opportunity to developand another does not. That one has it at the price of another. This is not envy, thisis the desire for just laws. They are not at all certain that the dictatorship of theproletariat will provide each person with a house and garden. The point is that theyprefer even a universal, just cot and common poverty to well-being rife withinjustice. Ideal Communism is tormented moral feeling, which has become awareof social injustice which it can no longer forget. That injustice eats away at its liverlike the eagle that tears at Prometheus.Why, therefore, do I, having capitalism at my right hand, whose hushedcynicism I know, and on the left, revolution, protest, and rebellion born of the mosthuman emotion, why then don’t I join with them? Why, my art is important to meand it needs noble, hot blood. Art and rebellion are almost identical. I am arevolutionary because I am an artist and as much as I am him, the entire thousand-year process from which I derive, sown with names like Rabelais or Montaigne,Lautréamont or Cervantes, was an uninterrupted incitement to rebellion, some-times on the scale of a hushed whisper, other times, exploding with full voice. Howdid it happen that to me, who entered literature under the sign of rebellion andprovocation, fully understanding that writing must be passionate, that to me fellthe role of being on the opposite side of the barricade?What considerations could have inclined me to such a betrayal of myvocation! Let us examine them. Would I consider the program of this revolution autopia and not believe that immutability, an eternity of injustice could change? Yetif for centuries, art has pushed toward this reform almost blindly, why should I236Volume 1resist today, when I am permeated inﬁnitely more strongly than they were with theawareness that humanity is moving, that it is moving faster and faster, that thecourse of history is accelerated and we are no longer walking, we are careening intothe future. Never was the word ‘‘immutability’’ less in tune with its time. Yet, in thatcase, maybe I will oppose the river of the incensed proletariat on the basis ofabsolute justiﬁcations, like God or deductions of an abstract mind? No, this craghas shifted from beneath my feet, absolutes have mixed with matter and, in dia-lectical movement, thought has become impure, dependent on being. Perhaps,therefore, I am resisting in the name of common pity, seeing the enormity of thesuffering and mounds of bodies inﬂicted by them? No. Why? If I am a child then Iam a child that has passed through Schopenhauer and Nietzsche’s school. To putit coldly: what is the pain of a million slaves or a hundred-million-body morgue? Ifyou gradually called to life all the victims tormented by history up to the presentday, it would be a never-ending procession. And don’t I know all too well that life istragic in its very essence?Right now as I am writing this, a small ﬁsh close to the Galápagos Islands iscrossing the threshold of hell because another ﬁsh has just devoured its tail.If suffering is unavoidable, then at least let man endow his suffering withhuman meaning. How does one resist a revolution if it endows us with meaning,our own meaning?
Monday
At one time, twenty years ago, I was a ‘‘landed gentleman,’’ a person belong-ing to a higher social class. Today? Today, materially ruined, I earn my living by thepen, an intellectual and artist liberated from all the dependencies who would bemore likely to ﬁnd understanding for his work and its economic necessity on theother side. If I turned to that side, how much support I would ﬁnd, what eager helpin everything. This would be very good for my fame. Perhaps there is some sort oflove of the past which rivets me? No, I have made a specialty of freedom and theschool of exile strengthened that which was in me from birth, the bitter joy ofseparating from that which separates itself from me. No, if someone is ‘‘withoutprejudice’’ it is I.I am undoubtedly shaped by the former world. Who of you, though, of you1956237Communists, is not a child of the past? If the revolution relies on overcoming aninherited consciousness, why couldn’t I do this, like you? By knowing dialectics,which takes self-reliance away from the spirit?
Tuesday
I would like to supplement the above—I have to add that my view of realityis not at all removed from their, Communist, view. My world is deprived of God. Inthis world, people create themselves mutually. Making man dependent on man,seeing man in a constant creative bond with others, permeating them through andthrough, dictating the most ‘‘personal’’ feeling. That is how it is in Ferdydurke and The Marriage.This is not all, though. I have always tried to bring out this ‘‘interhumansphere’’ artistically, which, in The Marriage, for instance, grows to the heights of acreative force superior to individual consciousness, something superior, the onlydeity accessible to us. This happens because an element of Form is producedbetween people that delineates each man individually. I am like a voice in anorchestra that must tune itself to its sound, ﬁnd its place in the melody or, like adancer for whom it is not so important exactly what is danced, the important thingis to join in the dance with others. And that is why neither my thought nor myfeeling is truly free or my own. I think and feel ‘‘for’’ people in order to rhyme withthem. I experience a warping as a consequence of this highest of necessities: tuningmyself to others in Form.I applied this thought to art, for example, attempting to show (in the pieceabout painting) that it is naive to think that our enthrallment with a work of artcomes from ourselves, that this rapture is born to a great extent not in people, butbetween people, and it is as if we mutually forced ourselves to admiration (al-though no one is awestruck ‘‘individually’’).It follows from this that thought and feeling entirely ‘‘my own’’ do not existfor me. There is artiﬁciality in even the most intimate reﬂexes, behold the elementof human essence, submitted to the ‘‘interhuman.’’ In that case, why does thefalsity and artiﬁciality of man, submitted to Communism, disturb me? What inter-feres with my acknowledging that this is exactly how it should be?One more thing. I am generally considered an aristocratic writer. I have238Volume 1nothing against this. Who, however, has more brutally felt the dependence of thehigher sphere on the lower? And who, I ask, has gone as far in feeling that creativity,beauty, vitality, all the passion and poetry of the world is contained in the subjuga-tion of the higher, the older, and the more mature to the lower and younger? This isall very much my own, as much as it can be mine, this is an experience which shouldweld me ardently to revolution. Why didn’t it do that?
Thursday
Lies.Dandy: that old nag has won my heart! He may be a little short in the neck,a little nervous, but what form in jumping, what a start at the bar and what a leap,softness and discretion when rounding the bends and also in acrobatics (I don’tdo this, but Lena does). Early in the morning, Lena and I set out, she on the calmerTilly, I on Dandy and together we delight in our gallop in the pastures and ﬁelds,where fences and wire enclosures are devoured by the leaps of our horses, wherea ﬂushed hare shoots out from under our hooves! Behind us sometimes are Marisaand Andrea, on the African Girl and Lord Perez, unable to keep up . . . de-spairing . . . signaling to us! Yesterday a ﬁerce quarrel with Du´ s and Sta´ s Wicken-hagen about Traviata, a thoroughbred mare, recently acquired, unfortunately ofmannered reﬂex, even though not without style. I am trying to loosen her up with a‘‘trockkett,’’ ﬁrst on a lead, then jumping, then at a measured trot, but the connois-seurs, even Jacek D˛ ebicki, who is less familiar with this, do not predict success.Lies, lies. On foot I am different, on horseback I am different. Horses lie tomorality, morality to horses, I to the horses, morality, and the girls. Suddenlyrelaxation. Frivolity. Who am I? ‘‘Am I’’ at all? From time to time, ‘‘I am’’ this orthat. . . .
Saturday
I walk along that tree-lined avenue, under the eucalyptus trees. Where isnorth? Where east? There, in the northeast, how many kilometers from here?Several thousand.What am I doing here, alone on the pampa, with a frivolity that is already1956239on the wing? And, again, this foretaste of dying slowly in a crushing underground.God, as it has been said, will not be a haven for me in old age. Nor will thetranscendencies of existentialism which is nothing but intoxication with its owntragicality. If only the neglected word ‘‘nation’’ would revive in me, simply to getclose to it physically. To get on a ship and allow their revolution to embrace andsweep me away . . . what would happen to me? Wouldn’t the temporal sense,temporal it is true, but enormous with that mass of human existence harnessed toit, wouldn’t it make me more resistant to my dying? To allow that historical energyto permeate me. To join them. Why do you hesitate? What am I afraid of? Yourecoil before this vulgarization, this humiliation? Yet you yourself know this, yousaid it yourself: the higher consciousness must acknowledge its dependence on thelower. And the aim, the moral aim, of life . . .I say this aloud to myself in order to familiarize myself with the presence ofthis thought. Yet I know at the same time that this is perfectly impossible. Thewords escape into silence, which alone remains, always present and unchanging.It can’t be done. Let us attempt to explain this improbability of nature noteven intellectually, but spontaneously. It can’t be done because I want to bemyself. Yes, even though I know that there is nothing more misleading than thatinaccessible ‘‘I,’’ I know, too, that all the honor and value of life depend on therelentless pursuit of and the relentless defense of the ‘‘I.’’ A Catholic would call thisa struggle for one’s own soul; an existentialist, the will to authenticity. Undoubt-edly, the central point of all these moralities, including the Marxist, is here: topreserve one’s ‘‘I,’’ one’s soul. How does the thing look in practice? Why, lo andbehold, I get on a ship and sail. Even en route I would have to amputate myself andthrow overboard half of what I considered to be of value. I would have to changemy taste and develop (a monstrous recourse) a new sensitivity and a new insen-sitivity, fashioning myself on the model of my new faith. In what state would Iarrive there? Wouldn’t I be like a doll made of putty, molded with my own ﬁngers?Yet Marxism outlines an argument that is too acute and splendid, whichstrikes at the very core, at that ‘‘I.’’ Your I, they say, has already been formed by theconditions of your life, by the process of your history. You are just as your exploitingsocial class created and delineated you, with a consciousness bound by the fact ofthat exploitation, falsiﬁed in its entire relation to the world because it does not wantnor can it admit that all of it is calculated to suck out someone else’s blood. In240Volume 1fortifying yourself in your ‘‘I,’’ you can only fortify yourself in your own warpedness.What do you want to defend? What do you want to remain obstinate in? That ‘‘I’’that was made for you and that kills the freedom of your real consciousness?An excellent argument and one in keeping with my view of man because Iknow for certain and I have tried a thousand times to express this certainty artis-tically: consciousness, the soul, the ‘‘I’’ are the results of our situation, in the worldand in people. This is probably the most central thought of Communism whichbreaks down into two points, both of which are exceedingly convincing. Primo, thatman is a being rooted in people, which means that his relationship to peopledetermines his entire relationship to the world. Secundo, that we cannot trustourselves, that the only thing capable of assuring us a personality is the sharpestawareness of exactly these dependencies that shape the personality.But now—attention! Let us catch them red-handed. Let us check the cards,how they are being dealt here, and reveal the trick with which this entire dialecticsbecomes a trap. This dialectic and liberating thinking stop exactly at the gates ofCommunism: I am allowed to cast aspersion on my own truths as long as I am onthe side of capitalism, but this same self-checking is supposed to cease the minute Ijoin the ranks of the revolution. Here dialectics suddenly gives way to dogma as aresult of some astounding about-face. This relative, mobile, murky world of minebecomes a world sharply delineated, a world in which everything is known andprecise. A minute ago, I was problematic but they made me like that just so I couldcrawl out of my skin more easily and now, when I am on their side, I have tobecome categorical. Doesn’t this amazing hypocrisy of every Communist withoutexception, of even those who are most intellectually reﬁned, jump out at you: aslong as it is a matter of destroying the old truth, this man amazes us with thefreedom of his unmasking spirit, his need for an inner honesty. When we areenticed by this song, however, and allow ourselves to be led to his doctrine, bam!the door slams behind us! Where are we? In a monastery? The army? Church?Some sort of organization? You seek new dependencies, warping your new con-sciousness in vain. Your consciousness was liberated and from now on, only trust isappropriate. Your ‘‘I’’ became a guaranteed ‘‘I,’’ one worthy of trust.I don’t want to oversimplify my criticism. I am not aiming at the terror,proper to their political organization, which kills the very freedom of thinking thatit stimulates in the enemy camp. I don’t mean their theory, even its very charac-1956241teristic paradoxes, like the one, for example, that the dialectical process of historystops the moment revolution reaches its full realization in the ideal system of thefuture. Nor am I aiming at their philosophical system or their political system,simply at the conscience of those Communists, who wave it like a banner. I want topin down that subtle but swinish change of tone when one switches into theirterritory, that sudden revelation of slyness, that awful experience when talking withthem of having light suddenly change into darkness. The feeling that you are notdealing with someone enlightened, but only with someone who is blinded like thedarkest night. A freethinker? Yes, in your backyard. In his own, a fanatic. Anunbeliever? In you. In himself he tends the faith with the zeal of a monk. A mystic,who plays the role of a skeptic, a believer using disbelief as an instrument wheneverit can serve his faith. You believed that you had a human soul before you thatcraved truth, but, behold, suddenly you faced the cunning eyes of politics. Youthought that it was a matter of awareness, that is, of the soul, that is, ethics, but itturns out that the most important thing is the triumph of revolution. And we seethat we are once again confronted with one of the great mystiﬁcations, similar tothose unmasked by Nietzsche, Marx, Freud, who revealed that behind the facadeof our Christian, bourgeois, and sublimated morality vied other, anonymous, andbrutal forces. Here the mystiﬁcation is all the more perverse, however, in that itrelies precisely on unmasking. This is one of the profoundest disillusionments thatone can experience in the sphere of ethics today because here it turns out that eventhe unmasking of forces becomes a mask, behind which hides the same eternalwill to power.This is the source of the dishonesty among them. And not only among thelesser functionaries. Their best minds are infected with that repulsive, halfheartedhonesty: honest in relation to someone else’s world yet inhibited, ready to castratethemselves of all integrity when it is a matter of their own chimera. Ophelia, getthee to a nunnery!Yet I could understand even this. Why it is a doctrine of action, a doctrineof creation, this is not thought about reality but thought that transforms reality andthat determines consciousness through being. They have to summon all theirenergy, so they limit consciousness. In that case, though, my, your, and universalmorality, all of basic human morality demands that you admit this. You have to say:we are being blind on purpose. As long as you cannot admit this, how is one to talk242Volume 1to someone who is dishonest in relation to himself? To join ranks with someonelike this is to lose the last patch of solid ground from under one’s feet and to plungeinto the abyss.
Sunday
The thaw . . . Let us assume that it will lead to a certain surrogate offreedom and truth in Russia and in Poland. To a 45% freedom, to a 47% truth.What of it?If I had been an inmate of that prison, I would hang onto this with bothhands. If up until now it was forbidden to leave the cell, then won’t it be fun to takea walk in the garden under the alert gaze of the guards? Who doubts that, inpractice, the smaller lie is better than the greater one? But beyond the immediatebit of freedom, there exists, of course, the matter of Polish form, Polish style, Polishdevelopment, and Polish becoming. Because I cannot bear what is ersatz and I willalways, in life as in a restaurant, protest when I am served a cat as rabbit, even inthis case, therefore, I cannot agree to this ersatz, surrogate, cosmetic and kitsch.Freedom by permission, concession to a relative freedom, what is this? Neither ﬁshnor fowl. As far as the authenticity of Polish life goes, this is worse than a 100% gag,the kind that doesn’t lie. This is the existence of a creature of mixed ancestry;unclean; weak, half-alive, incomplete in its real expression. . . .For me, the most awful thing in our culture has been that we have alwaysrestricted our spirit, voluntarily or because we were forced to. Our entire literature,all of our art is a symptom of this. When Polish awareness was incarcerated inrecent years, perhaps it was not all that bad for our soul. Our insufﬁcient produc-tion of words was stiﬂed and replaced with open lies, while a prisoner could talk tohimself and these were probably honest conversations. Then life fell apart into anexternal deceit and an inner truth, a difﬁcult state of things but not a lethal one.Who knows if stupidity did not just sharpen reason somewhere deep inside?Releasing their spirit into relative freedom on the condition that it is toreport twice a week to the nearest Bureau of Supervision would simply constitute ablurring of this sharp but salutary line of demarcation, which, up until now, hasdivided the imprisoned truth from free deceit. They would enter into an area ofhalf-truth, half-life, incomplete creativity, intoxicating oneself with appearances.1956243What would the result be? I do not deny that this opportunity for ramming thedoors open for the future should be exploited politically. My ﬁeld is not politics. Iknow only that style, form, expression, whether it be in art or in life, are notattained by making concessions and cannot be fabricated in measured doses. AutCaesar . . .Sometimes they say to me from over there that now my responsibility to myhomeland would be to return. For what, I would like to know. So that I couldbecome a person worthy of pity (because if an engineer or a worker has some rightto respect in that system, then a writer, that ‘‘writer’’ of theirs, led by the nose andleading by the nose, is a repugnantly grotesque ﬁgure, a comic combination ofschoolteacher and pupil—these are the two sides of didacticism). So when you tellme that I am wasting myself in exile, I will tell you about how important a nationalrole I have earmarked for myself.Using their dictionary, what type of ‘‘social need’’ could assure that myAmerican existence is not deprived of meaning for at least certain people inPoland? For what kind of people? Not for those for whom a child’s pants areenough. It is certain, however, that beyond that artiﬁcial, childish, substandardtimid reality, there is another penetrating, sharp, sober knowledge in Poland whichdoes not want to cheat itself, the tone is different, more reasonable, more cruellymature. My task was to get to exactly this Polish sound, get to this tragic and awarePole. Not to stuff him with other delusions or to make anything easier for him. Iwant to express the ruthlessness of this Polish task, which clamors for full awarenessand a full existence. Is it a paradox that I, who am at cross-purposes with thisawareness in its philosophical aspect, that I have to—this is stronger than I am—insist on this, demand it, as a condition sine qua non of our humanity?And one more thing. It would be important that tragedy not become acatastrophe. They got into the iron cogs of collective life without the appropriatehistorical preparation that would have made their individual life indomitable.Many of them today, therefore, simply do not know how to be themselves honestly,decently, vitally. They do not know how to endure in themselves, without appear-ing under any banner and without seeking refuge in a system, dogma, faith. Theyare helpless and humiliated. I claim, therefore, that one has to work out a style ofindividual life and one so extreme that it can withstand this pressure.What could be more important for Polish culture, no matter what direction244Volume 1it takes, than the creation of this style that assumes our maturity? This modus vivendi must be set, as it is only on this will to awareness that Polish authenticity canbe built in the future. If a man in Poland believes that he is base only because he isa conscious man . . . if he allows himself to be talked into impotence . . . well, thena long childhood still awaits us.This is not something that I can teach, however, I am not a teacher. I canonly infect others with my manner of being, which is contained in my books, inthis diary.
Tuesday
Poland, the thaw, the return, Communism, why have I waded into this,why do I discuss these details of my fate?And morality? I delineate myself in the face of Catholic ethics or existen-tialism or Marxism but morality is only a fragment, just one of the faces that attackme from all sides, all sides! Reality is inexhaustible. What should I do with myself?What should I do with myself? This settling of accounts with my conscience didn’tsolve anything in me, once again I simply am—I am on this Argentine pampa, onthis estancia.Tomorrow I leave for Buenos Aires. I have to pack my things. There will bea long journey by boat northward, along the River Paraná.
Thursday
Geography.Where am I?I was walking along the eucalyptus-lined avenue for the last time. There Iwas, facing those trees, in the perspective of the avenue, on such frail ground, amidthings distinct: tree, leaf, clod, stick, bark.At the same time, I was in South America, but where was north, west, south?Where am I positioned in relation to China or Alaska? Where is the polar cap?Dusk and the enormous vault of the pampa casts the stars out of itself, oneafter another, their swarms show themselves extracted by the night, a palpableworld of trees, earth, leaves, the only friendly and believable world, dissolved into1956245some sort of un— — —, unseeing, nonexistence, faded away. In spite of this I walk, Ipush on and on, but not on the road anymore but in the cosmos, suspended inastronomical space. Can the globe of the earth, itself suspended, assure you groundunder your feet? I found myself in a bottomless abyss, in the womb of the universe,and what is worse, this was not an illusion, only the truest of truths. You could gocrazy if you weren’t used to it.I write in the train that takes me to Buenos Aires, to the north. Paraná is theenormous river on which I will sail.I am calm. I sit. I look out the window. I look at the woman who sits acrossfrom me and has tiny, freckled hands. At the same time, I am there in the womb ofthe universe. All of the contradictions vent themselves in me: calmness and fury,sobriety and intoxication, truth and claptrap, greatness and smallness. Yet onceagain I feel an iron grip being applied to my throat, which slowly, so very impercep-tibly, constricts.
The Rio Paraná Diary
Tuesday
At one in the afternoon, the boat left shore, but I had not noticed it as I waslooking at the ships deep in port which slowly began to move and along with them,everything began to move, as if on an axle, to my left, and Buenos Aires moved. . . .We sail.Six in the evening. Cutting across the entire width—about seventy kilometers—of the Río de la Plata, we practically reach the green shores of Uruguay. We sail inthe delta.Eight in the evening. We are sailing along the delta. The waters are metallic,the sky angry, the clouds have unloosed their hair over Uruguay and it reaches theearth in strands of rain. Grief.The waters swell, gather, and before us a cloud has plugged the horizon, theriver swells with darkness, the cloud unrolls bolts of darkness from out of itself, thedarkness steams from shores kilometers away. We sail on.Two in the morning. A moment ago I awoke and immediately a slight trem-bling, permeated by a barely perceptible rocking, reminded me of where I was. I was on246Volume 1a ship, in its cabin. But where was the ship? I understood that I didn’t know what washappening to the ship and it was as if I didn’t know what was happening to me. Thevibrations announced that we were sailing, but . . . where, how were we sailing? Afterhaving gotten hurriedly dressed, I went on deck. Rain . . . was going on. The rustle ofrain and its drops suddenly grazing my cheeks, as well as the wet boards, the drippingroofs, railings, and ropes. Yet we were sailing. Not one light on the ship, whosedarkness bored into the darkness, but these two darknesses did not join, each wasseparate and you could not see the water, you saw nothing around you, as if someonehad conﬁscated everything. There was only the rain ﬁlling out the sailing in a doubledarkness. We sailed northwest and, as a result of the all-encompassing night, oursailing became, along with the rain, the only, the highest idea, the zenith of all things.I returned to my cabin and undressed. While I undressed, lay down, and fellasleep, we sailed.
Wednesday, Four in the Afternoon
The sky is all feathers and ﬂowers, ﬂourishes of lights on a ﬂuid expanse,while there in the distance, white pours out like a gate leading to worlds beyond. Yetwe sail on. We have passed the monastery of San Lorenzo and continue to sail, onour right, the lands of Entre Ríos, on the left, Santa Fe, and we sail.One of the men has ﬁeld glasses through which one can see an unknownshore, shrub, tree, or board, which, suddenly, appears black in the muddled watersand then is carried away. Today again I stood next to him and then he asked:Do you want to look?He said the same thing to me yesterday but today it sounded different. Itsounded as if he really hadn’t wanted to say it or as if what he said had not beencompletely said, as if it had been painfully interrupted. I looked at him, but his facewas congenial, calm. We sail on. With the accompanying green (because we sailednear the shore), darker, lighter, the overﬂow saturated with light and gathered tobursting, until, it seemed, it was entering the sky. We, on the other hand, sail on. Wesailed while I ate breakfast and when, after a game of chess, I went on deck, I saw thatwe were still sailing. Yellow water, whitish sky.Evening of the same day. From behind the fence of the black cloud anenormous, spouting red face looked out and lashed horizontally with a stream of1956247glistening water, as a result of which the mirror of waters became slanted and themost distant archipelagoes there, beyond the isthmuses, in the depths of the bay,ascended. And the sun struck the city Paraná, which, rufﬂing its turkey feathers andspreading its peacock’s tail, became a bastion of colors, a fortress of hues explodingwith a barrage, breathing ﬁre, bombarding wildly in this silence and solemn calm. Achoir of ﬂashes rose from the waters. We quickly sailed out of this landscape and nowwe are sailing along a groove which widens at times to ten kilometers and the water isabundant, almost excessive, we, on the other hand, sail on, sail on.I met a priest, who played chess with me, at the ‘‘proa’’ (the bow).We sail, I said.Yes, he replied, we sail.
Wednesday Night Going on Thursday
Again I woke up (in the middle of the night), not being able to bear thethought that it, the ship, sails without me, when I am not with it and I don’t knowthat it sails or how it sails. . . . The starriness of the sky. The ship pressed uphill,against the current, against the wind, and about a hundred meters later I saw thewhite wall of a lofty shore, which was moving astern without stopping, astern, astern!
The Next Morning
Powerless expanse, lazy river, the air stands, the ﬂag droops, but we push onwith the noise of motionless whiteness—constantly ahead—and we sail into theequatorial sphere, so that even though there is no sun, it is warmer.The industrialist from San Nicolas spoke:—Lousy weather . . . yet again thisdidn’t sound right, as if he had wanted to say something else, yes, something else. . . . Ihad the same impression when, at breakfast, a doctor from Asunción, a politicalexile, told me about the local women. He talked. But he talked precisely so as not tosay anything (this thought hounds me), in such a way as not to say what he reallyhad to say. I looked at him but nothing, a congenial face, satiety and bliss, without atrace of any mystery. After breakfast when I went on deck, I realized that during ourconversation, just as during breakfast, we were sailing. . . . And now we are sail-ing. . . . The wind struck me from the side. We sailed through the strait joining the248Volume 1two oceans, the ocean before us augured a boundless whiteness, the ocean behind uswas a mass barely perceptible behind the shoals smoking with sand. The strait itselfwas a geography of bays, promontories, islands and islets and strange secret branch-ings, which led into an unknown incline. At one point, we sailed into a group ofseven mirrored lakes, being the seven spokes of mystical raptures, each at a differentheight but all suspended in the subcelestial regions. After about a half hour, all ofthis fell away and settled in the river, which appeared once more and on which wesail, sail. . . .
Evening of the Same Day
Monkeys and clowns! Snakes and geysers! The parrots and frolicking ofplayful violet dandies! Fountains and parrot and heated fun, threaded onto roosterscarves, the water became a warble, this is the zoology, this is the ornithology onwhich we sail with the inevitable furrow and noise behind us.Two women—the librarian in a coin necklace and the wife of the engineer—were talking on deck. I could not quite hear and this was surely trivial woman talk,unimportant, yes, but who knows if not too unimportant. I say ‘‘too,’’ aware of thedisturbing idea that this word contains. However, there was nothing in this that was‘‘too much,’’ everything was as it should be . . . and while they talked, they sailed, justas I sailed, too.
Morning of the Next Day
The river is pale, rustling, stagnant. We sail.At night something happened. Or, to put it more precisely, something gaveway, or, maybe something broke through. . . . Actually, I don’t know what happenedand, to tell the truth, nothing happened. But it was exactly the ‘‘nothing happened’’that was more important and worse than if something had happened. Behold theevent: I tried to sleep and I fell into a deep sleep (because I have been getting too littlesleep lately), when all of a sudden I woke up overcome to the bone with a terrifying,devastating concern that something was happening . . . which I couldn’t control . . .something beyond me. I tore myself out of bed, ran out and there, on deck, the lineswere taut, the vibrations, the tension of the whole pushing on in silence, at night, in1956249the immobility and invisibility of the world, this movement the sole living thing. Wesailed on. And all of a sudden (as I just mentioned), something broke and the seal ofsilence broke and a shout . . . one resounding cry . . . rang out. A shout that  was not. I knew with absolute certainty that no one shouted and, at the same time, I knew thatthere had been a shout. Because there was no one who could have shouted, I recog-nized my fright as nonexistent and returned to my cabin and even fell asleep. Uponawakening at nine-thirty, I noticed that we were still sailing along a river silver as aﬁsh’s underbelly.What, therefore, had happened? The whole secret is that nothing took place.And nothing continues to happen and the best detective in the world would ﬁnd noclue, nothing to latch onto. We eat abundantly and with relish. Our conversationsare carefree. All are satisﬁed. The doctor, a Paraguayan, picks up a pack of Par-ticulares, which a brown-haired man with bushy eyebrows dropped and then wavedaway with his hand as a sign that there were no cigarettes in the pack. At the sametime, a child runs by, tugging on a small locomotive and, at the same time, anestanciero calls to his wife, who has just tied a scarf around her neck there on thestairs. Newlyweds on their honeymoon are having their picture taken. So what is sospecial about all this? What ship is more ordinary? What deck the more banal? Yetprecisely because, oh, precisely because we are completely vulnerable . . . in the faceof that which threatens . . . we can do nothing because there is no basis for even theleast anxiety and all is in the most perfect order . . . yes, everything is in order . . . aslong as the line, the line, the line does not snap under the unceasing pressure!
Evening of the Same Day
Enormous, anonymous waters. We sail on.The doctor made fun of me when I lost the chess game to the fumbler, whomhe introduced to me as Goldberg, the master of Santa Fe. He said:—You lost out of fear.I said: I could give him the rook and win.But my and his words are like silence before a shout. We sail on toward . . . wehead for . . . and I now see clearly that the faces, conversations, movements areloaded. They are defeated. Frozen in a pitiless leading of something to . . . An unpre-dictable tension crouches in the smallest movement. We sail on. Yet this madness,250Volume 1this despair, this horror are inaccessible because they don’t exist and because they arenot, they are in a way that is impossible to refute. We sail on. We sail on the water, asif from another planet and night begins to steam in from all sides, our ﬁeld of visionbegins to narrow and we in it. Yet we sail on and in us grows without respite . . .what? . . . what? . . . We sail on.
Next Day
Whatever we do, whatever we say, whatever we devote ourselves to, we sailand sail. While I write this, we also sail. The faces are terrifying because they aresmiling. Terrifying movements because they are full of calmness and marvelous bliss.We sail. The ship trembles, the machine works, the rustling billows of waterat shipside, sprays and dregs, we sail on, plunging deeper, ever deeper into . . .reaching. . . . Words are no help because while I am saying this, we sail on!
Next Day
We sail. We’ve sailed all through the night and even now we sail!
Next Day
We sail. The complete helplessness in the face of pathos, the incapacity to getat this power, which happens in us with a constant straining and tightening. Ouruneventfulness, the most common uneventfulness, explodes like a bomb, like a thun-derbolt, but beyond us. The explosion is unattainable for us, cursed in commonness.A moment ago, I met a Paraguayan at the bow and I said, yes, I said, ha, I said!Good day!He, on the other hand, answered, ha, he answered, yes, he answered, Omerciful God, he answered (sailing all the while):Nice weather!1956251Goya
Monday
Then I sailed back slowly and sleepily from north to south and yesterday, ateight in the evening, I was transferred from the ship to a motorboat, which let me offat the port . . . Goya, a small town, 30,000 inhabitants, in the province of Corrientes.This is one of those names which, when we see them on a map, sometimesarouse our curiosity because they are uninteresting and nobody goes there. What,therefore, could this be . . . Goya? The ﬁnger pauses at a name like this—villages inIceland, towns in Argentina, and the temptation arises to go there. . . .
Wednesday
Goya, a ﬂat town.A dog. A storekeeper in front of the corner store. Red truck. No comment.Unworthy of a remark. Here it is as it is.
Thursday
The house in which I live is spacious. It is the old and worthy seat of acertain local estanciero (estancieros usually have two homes: one on the estancia,the other in Goya). The garden is full of mastodons: cacti.Here I am. Why here? If someone had told me years ago in Ma™oszyce thatI would one day be in Goya . . . If I am in Goya, then by equal right I could beanywhere else and suddenly all the places in the world begin to weigh heavily onme, demanding that I be there.I stroll along Plaza Sarmiento in a bluish evening. An exotic foreigner tothem. Finally through them, I become a stranger to myself: here, I lead myselfaround Goya as a person unknown to myself. I stand him on a corner, I sit himdown on a chair in a café. I tell him to exchange meaningless words with a randompartner and I listen to my voice.252Volume 1Monday
I stopped by the Club Social and drank coffee.I talked to Genaro.Molo and I rode the jeep to the airport.I worked on my novel.I went to the little square overlooking the river.A little girl, riding a bike, dropped a package which I picked up.A butterﬂy.Four oranges eaten on a bench.Sergio went to the movies.A monkey on a wall then, a parrot.All of this happened as if at the bottom of a deep deep silence, at thebottom of my stay here in Goya, on the peripheries of the earth. Who knows whythis town became mine. This abatement . . . Goya, why had you never appeared tome in a dream, why hadn’t I ever sensed that you were fated to me, that you werealong the way? There is no answer. Houses. A street latticed with angular shadow.A dog lying down. A bicycle leaning against a wall.
Rosario
Monday
Rosario. We reached port at about three a.m. after a seven-hour delaybecause the water in the river is low. Not wanting to awaken the Dzianotts, Istrolled around the city until seven. Trade. Exchange, budget, balance, invest-ments, credit, inventory, account, netto, brutto, just this, nothing more, the wholecity is under the sign of accounting. The dullness of this fat America.Rena and her husband and also little Jacek Dzianott, erupting with joy,which really is our sole victory over being and the only human praise. Why, though,is that pride and praise contained in a twelve-year-old child so that one has to benddown toward it? And why is development the road to humiliating bitterness? Howironic that our highest emblem, our proudest banner is a child’s knickers.1956253Buenos Aires
Thursday
After four months of sojourns and visits to faraway places, I am here again. Icame home to a stack of letters on my desk. It is one in the morning. I have ﬁnishedreading the letters. In a moment, after I have placed the period at the end of thissentence, I will get up, stretch, begin to take things out of my suitcase, and go to thehallway to get my address book, which I left by the telephone.
XXI
Wednesday
After returning to Buenos Aires, I changed my daily routine. I get uparound eleven, but I put off shaving until later because it is very tiresome. Thencomes breakfast, consisting of tea, baked goods, butter, and two soft eggs on theeven days of the week and two hard ones on the odd. After breakfast, I get down towork and I write until the desire to stop working overcomes my reluctance toshave. When this breakthrough occurs, I shave with pleasure. Shaving inclines oneto go downtown, therefore, I go to the Café Querandi, on the corner of Morenoand Peru, for coffee and croissants and reading La Razon.I return home to work some more, but these hours I devote to earningmoney by working for the local press or to sitting down to my Remington andtaking care of my correspondence. While at this, I puff on my Dunhill or on myBBB Ultonia and I smoke Hermes para pipa tobacco. After eight, I go the CaféSorrento for supper and then the program varies, depending on the circumstances.I earmark the late night hours for reading books, which, unfortunately, are notalways the kind I really desire to read. . . .I bought six summer shirts that were on sale for a very good price.
Thursday
A pile of newspapers from Poland, sent to me by Giedroy´ c. Nowa Kultura, ˙Zycie Literackie, Przegl˛ ad Kulturalny, Po Prostu . . . I leaf through them. New254Volume 1people. Unfamiliar names: Lapter, Bartelski, Toeplitz, Bratny. Who are these peo-ple? Reviews of books of which I know nothing, references to events I have neverheard of, limericks with incomprehensible allusions, conﬂicts and tensions whichare unfamiliar to me. It is all as if I had sneaked up to the walls of a great encamp-ment in the dead of night and began listening to the voices that reached me. Whatsort of din is this? I was once a foreigner in Poland because my literature was exoticand was rejected. Today, once again, I wander along its peripheries.I look through these publications and would like to ﬁnd out what is reallyhappening in them. The temporality of what they write is indisputable: I was notable to extract a single text, a single author about which I could say, here beginsgenuine work of the spirit, deﬁnite, conscious, not opportunistic, calculated toendure. The problem is not what they write. I would like to be able to see into theirheads: what are they thinking? Do I understand what has happened to them? Is ispossible to so strangle the word that it betrays nothing?In these not too interesting columns full of settling accounts called tenyears of People’s Poland, they use a balance sheet similar to those used in otherlines of production: they count their little volumes of poetry and determine whatthe output of the prose factory has been. What if I, standing at the sidelines,gropingly, practically blindly, took stock of the decade for them? By listening not totheir words, but to their voices.
Friday
Let us conﬁrm that they passed through two vast experiences: war andrevolution. And, let us say, that they can be, represent, or create something onlyinsofar as these experiences have entered their bloodstream. For they have ceasedbeing people from the year 1939. They are 1956 models. If, having lost that reality,they have not adequately assimilated the new one, if they are not to an adequatedegree this or that, then what are they? Nothing.It seems to me precisely that they have not experienced their lives.Their inexperiencing of the war. Someone in these newspapers refers toAdolf Rudnicki. He was supposed to have said that the literature of postwar Polandis incapable of adequately exhausting the subject of war, that not everything possi-1956255ble has been extracted from this infernal abyss. It is true that not much has beenmined, but is hell conducive to exploitation?These writers, among others and most of all Rudnicki, got busy working onthe bodies of the tortured thinking that the astronomical level of suffering wouldfurnish them with some sort of truth, morality, or at least some new knowledgeabout our limitations. They found little that turned out to be fertile and creative.They discovered, just as Borowski had, that there is no bottom to our baseness. Yetif we are all base, then none of us are. This thought humiliates us only when it isused to distinguish one man from another. They discovered that culture, the blithespirit type of aesthetes and intellectuals, is only froth. What an antediluvian andchildish revelation at that! In describing this inhumanity, they appealed for hu-manity in a moralizing tone (Andrzejewski), but nothing is changed by suchpriestly sermons, neither in the one who preaches them nor in those who hearthem. The embarrassing contrast between the pile of mangled bodies and thewanness of this commentary, which, in spite of the abundant exclamation points,has been incapable of thinking up anything beyond the pia desideria alreadycontained in the statements of the Holy Father, namely, that people should not bebad but good. Proust found more in his cookie, servant, and counts than theyfound in years of smoking crematoria. There is also nothing surprising in the factthat this blinding smoke became the incense offered to a new dictatorship. They(forgetting about the smoke of Kolyma) burned it to pay homage to their newfoundliberation under the Stalinist regime. This was followed by the domestication ofhell and the harnessing of it into constructive political work.I don’t consider their artistic impotence in the face of the war to be shame-ful; on the contrary, it was predictable. Why is it that a soldier goes to the front,comes to know atrocities, becomes one himself, and then returns to civilian life asif nothing had ever happened . . . exactly as he had been before setting out. Thereis such a thing as an overdose. The organism rejects it. That is why, if I were thecomrade-chairman of their Literary Union in those postwar days, I would recom-mend an exceptional caution, or at least exceptional cunning, in treating demonicthemes that are simply too vast. If Proust got more out of his counts, it was becausehe could move and feel easily among them and the cookie did not overwhelm him.Four million murdered Jews, however, are the Himalayas! I would ban that typicalPolish naïveté that believes that there is something to discover only on peaks.256Volume 1There is nothing on peaks except snow, ice, and rock. There is a lot, however, tosee in one’s own garden. When you near the mountains of a million torments withyour pen, you are overcome by fear, respect, horror, your pen trembles and yourlips produce nothing but a moan. But one does not create literature with moans.Nor with a void à la Borowski. Or with ‘‘conscience’’ à la Father Andrzejewski.Of course, this pertains not just to literature. An average member of thePolish ‘‘intelligentsia’’ was incapable of experiencing the war all the way to itsdregs. In these circumstances the only honest approach to the matter would be notto strain to experience something which cannot be experienced, but to ask pre-cisely why such an experience is inaccessible. Poles have not yet experienced thewar. A Pole has experienced only that the war cannot be experienced, cannot beexperienced fully, cannot be exhausted and especially when peace introduces adifferent dimension, normality. The issue conceived of in this way would at leasthave the advantage of not debilitating them philosophically, morally, and emo-tionally in peacetime. By apprehending the capacity of their nature, these peoplecould more easily recover their balance.Their attitude to the war, however, has undergone distortion. The war wasperceived in conventional terms: as a ‘‘great’’ experience from which one has todraw, therefore, great emotions and great lessons. Whoever does not draw them isevil. However, since no one could draw them, everybody felt evil and when theybegan to feel evil, they became careless. And, of course, one could have said tothem: know that war isn’t a bit more horrifying than that which happens in yourgarden on a sunny day. If you know what goes on in the world and in life in general,then why does war horrify you? And if you don’t know what goes on, why do youinsist on having precisely this kind of knowledge about the war?One does not have to interpret the above remarks as cynicism—because allthat is desired here is to conﬁrm that there are phenomena to which access by theshortest possible route is impossible. One can get close to them only via the wholeworld and via human nature in its more basic aspects.Their inexperiencing of the revolution. So exactly what was it from the warthat made its way into their consciousness—what became formulated? A variety ofcasual thought about ‘‘atrocities’’ and a somewhat lame, moralizing pathos.In reality, the end of the war found them turned upside down, stunned,emptied. They were still capable of various collective actions, they participated in1956257organizations, but this was because they grabbed hold of just about anything tosurvive, just to move, the instinct of struggle and life convulsed them, but they hadbeen stunned. Marxism ﬁlled the vacuum in them. Marxism, I imagine, fell onthem before they were really able to come to themselves, that is, to their prewarselves. I think, too, that they did not experience the revolution because they didn’thave anything to experience it with. If only Marxism had appeared in Polandspontaneously, gradually, overcoming resistance. Instead Marxism was imposedon that country, just as one drops a cage over a stunned bird or clothes a nakedperson.At the instant they found themselves in a cage, all Polish discussion ofrevolution became impossible. This also goes for the secret dialogue of the individ-ual soul with Marxism, as Poles were completely unprepared to face this pressure.Our culture was individualistic only superﬁcially. When had a Pole’s individualismbeen anything more than loosening his belt a few notches? Had it ever occurred tous that individualism might be virtue or the difﬁcult responsibility of being faithfulto oneself? How could souls raised on Mickiewicz, Sienkiewicz, and ˙Zeromski oppose themselves effectively to Marxism? When the Poles were shackled it wastoo late to organize a conscious Polish individualism, so they, deprived of intellec-tual arms and doubtful of their moral right, swung around in a clumsy mannerinstead of ﬁghting. They rejected Marxism and did not absorb it into their con-sciousness. The paradoxical result is that in bourgeois countries of the West, inFrance or in Italy, Marxism is inﬁnitely more profoundly experienced. In Poland,Marxism is merely the social system in which one lives and which one does notexperience. Poland: one of the least Marxist countries in the world.
Wednesday
Returning to these newspapers from Poland, which lie here on the shelf. Inmy opinion, the people over there, in Poland, barely exist. . . . They exist only to acertain extent . . . it is a puny, introductory existence.So that my words don’t ring empty. Behold a characteristic symptom oftheir incomplete existence in this new reality.How did they experience the people, the proletariat? I am speaking of the258Volume 1intelligentsia. Why, this proletariat suddenly crawls into the scene in a leadingrole: a member of the intelligentsia should have, out of fear alone, detected thispresence all the more strongly. . . .Of course, in these newspapers, the proletariat is exactly like the one on theposter, stalwart and radiant. If before our war, the ‘‘upper stratum,’’ which was sothreatened with the wild and bottomless inferiority in Poland at that time, wasunable to come up with anything more on this subject than a paper, scribbled withphilanthropy, social do-gooding, and ˙Zeromskian heroic self-sacriﬁce, then nowthe attitude of the intelligentsia to the people has become debased and smoothlyrattled off with ofﬁcial phraseology. Understandable. Logical. But unofﬁcially? Intheir poetry, metaphor, language, in the manner, or rather, in the tone, of theirthinking, I seek the echoes of an intenser experience of inferiority as a creativeforce. Yet if this was in them, it would have to manifest itself somehow. But nothinghappens. It is as if their imagination has fallen asleep.Their lack of feeling for the people—for at least (they are allowed this) itsbeauty and its poetry. It is downright incredible and even shocking! The revolutionfalsiﬁed and diluted their relations with the proletariat, reducing them to ‘‘con-structive cooperation,’’ when, in reality, this is a tragic but creative struggle offorces. What, in a revolutionary’s thinking, is a member of the intelligentsia sup-posed to do with a worker, with a peasant? Build a factory together? Enlightenhim? Create a common party front? Technical cooperation is not personal contact.Personal contact, on the other hand, will immediately erupt into misunderstand-ing, antipathy, distrust, revulsion, and fear because these two levels of conscious-ness, the higher and the lower, are foreign and hostile to one another and superi-ority can contact, can join with inferiority only through violence and struggle.According to me, therefore, never before has the contact of the Polish intelligentsiawith the lower stratum been as impersonal, so exclusively technical or lifeless, thatis, spiritually uncreative. I am not considering, I repeat, their bureaucratic think-ing, that which they write on demand. I claim that even quietly and surreptitiously,no such thoughts visit them. Who of them, the weary, would be dazzled by thebeauty of this skirmish of the spheres? That it is splendid when the higher con-sciousness swoops down on the lower like a bird of prey? Or perhaps even moresplendid, when inferiority allows itself to do violence to superiority? Having over-come my detestation of rhymed verse, I read their poems and drown in constructiv-1956259ist boredom. I did not come upon a single accent that would have led me out intothe ﬁeld of these tensions.Let us, therefore, note: in People’s Poland, no one really, personally, experi- ences the people. They are fed up with the proletariat. They have lost their sensitivity.
Friday
Today a sleazy guy sat down at my table in the café and told me that hewanted to possess a twelve-year-old girl and that she, too, would want to. . . . Hecursed the authorities, the state, the social system, the law, priests, civilization, andculture. He swore quietly, mawkishly, in a melancholy way, picking at his ear witha dirty ﬁnger and looking at the ceiling.Supper in Crillon with Rodriguez Feo. Virgilio and Humberto were alsothere. Rodriguez Feo is the editor of the pretty good literary monthly El Ciclon inHavana. He came to visit. All are Cubans. A strange species! They are intelligentand well informed, but they are not made of clay but water. Moving, gleaming,vanishing ﬂuidity.Returning home, I thought about Poland and about those fellow writers ofmine. Sometimes it seems to me that I should think about them with greaterhumility. However, the certainty that I am more than they are . . . allows me tomake no concessions. Not talent, reason, or moral values determine hierarchy, butthis most of all: a stronger, more real existence.I am alone. That is why I exist more.
Sunday
I am angry when I read their press to discover that even in the area of art,they have turned out to be sluggish. It is astounding that, even though the revolu-tion shook the foundations of their being, nothing has changed in their literaryworks. The world has caved in, but the little world, the artistic one, has remaineduntouched. Here before me is that cheap Parnassus from before the war, just as itwas except that it was a different color. The searching reﬂections ‘‘about theessence of poetry’’ or, too, about painting, contests, awards, reviews . . . and this oneis the ‘‘leading prose writer,’’ that one a ‘‘fabulous poet.’’260Volume 1It is irritating after an earthquake in your house, to discover that the only thingsremaining are those that are the least valuable and the least ﬁxed. What could oneexpect of a revolution (if it became an experience)? At least some sort of brief clashwith reality so that for one instant they would have to look into the eyes of this Medusa.It is a fact, a fact that is a merciless force before which one must bend, thatpoems are not read. That practically no one is able to distinguish a good paintingfrom a bad one. That the races of these horses, that is, excuse me, of the variouspanting pianists and other virtuosos vying for primacy have as much in commonwith art as horse races. That museums are archlifeless things that only induceheadaches. I intentionally do not want to reach to the roots of these absurdities. Iam merely listing them. Could one not have expected that the ﬁctions, silliness,and idiocies of art would be shoved against a wall by the revolution and thataesthetics would be built on facts, not illusions, nor on conventions or traditions?Why should one acquiesce to the fact, for example, that Wyspia ´ nski isannounced our national playwright and poet, if there aren’t even a hundred peo-ple in the country who are adequately familiar with his work? How is one to claimthat S™owacki or Mickiewicz fascinate if they do not captivate? Why do you say thatKasprowicz lives among you if you know him only from the catalogs of libraries? Itwould seem that these questions ought to be left where the social sense of art risesto the forefront. But they are still indecent. If my Kultura article ‘‘Against Poets’’were published in Poland, it would become an article that is called revolutionarybut your own revolution should have introduced this revolution long ago. Oneshould have approached art brutally, destroyed its myths, searched the impossiblyarchaic language of its acolytes and adherents and consolidated it in that which is.Then one could have moved forward somewhat. Troubled, you asked, how shouldwe go about this? Why, it’s very simple. Stop claiming falsely that ‘‘art fascinates.’’Say, in keeping with the truth, that, it is true, art fascinates from time to time butthat it is mainly people who force themselves into a mutual fascination with art.Force themselves? Why? How? What for? I wrote about this elsewhere, yet noticethat the very determination of the matter tears you out of the circle of false worshipof artiﬁcial value and of an anachronistic liturgy.Hasn’t revolution created a climate for such realism? Isn’t it in keepingwith the spirit of Marxism? I am thinking not of the errant Marxist theory of art, butits spirit. This concept of art, as dialectical as possible, shows us artistic experience1956261as something arising ‘‘among’’ people. For a Pole such realism would be a greatattainment, it would create our own approach to art, it would lead us to anaesthetics more in keeping not only with life, but also with our nature.Instead of this—what? Nothing has been done. People demand that art be‘‘for the masses,’’ which is equal to demanding that it be drab. People demand thatart be for the masses, but the relationship of the masses to art has not beenreformed. It has still remained ‘‘fascinating.’’ The artist has been bureaucratized,maintaining the priesthood intact as well as the whole church and all the masses init. Pooh! One more element of the absurd has been added and it is of no meanformat. In Western societies, a bourgeois with a secondary education opines that hereally can absorb a Bach fugue or Raphael’s painting. But the People’s Democracyfeels that any yokel or workman, having a ‘‘soul sensitive to beauty,’’ can feel hisway into a Chopin sonata, so he is led to a concert and he ‘‘experiences’’ thiscultural session, in exactly the same way they experience everything else overthere, no more. What kitsch!And again. I know, I understand, that nothing could be done as long asZhdanov ruled. But to this day, I see no clues that would indicate even the slightpossibility of such a revision germinating over there.
Monday
Giedroyc has sent me a new stack of publications—these are from recentmonths, March and April.After Comrade Khrushchev’s speech and the revelations of the XXth Con-gress. A new stage and a change of course. They are elated and proud.Nevertheless, these articles, poems, letters to the editor, comments, seemas if they were written by one and the same person. Deviations are minimal. Onetheme dominates unanimously: the XXth Congress and the new course.Most of all it is moving to see how happy they are with the piece of life thathas been apportioned to them.As for these people in Poland, the few who want to live seriously and wantto achieve something universally important, that is, not locally, but on a worldscale . . . they are going to have to dismiss with a smile the celebration and joy at thepermitted freedom.262Volume 1Tuesday
I read what I wrote above about the proletariat and art. How unconvincingthis will be for those who do not understand me, for whom my meaning is elusive.There are legions of such readers. Oh, that they have an ear sufﬁciently tuned towarn them that these are not just ﬂighty caprices, but rather an indication of a roadthat is difﬁcult, because it is not in the clouds but on the ground.I return to my point of departure: they have not experienced their lives. Yes,this is why I am so haughty toward them, so conceited and indifferent. I simplycannot acknowledge that these are people on my level. Behold, considering thatnot a tenth of what befell them has befallen me and that, while they bled, I wasmaking the rounds of Buenos Aires cafés, a feeling like this—I admit—is not reallyin order. Humility and admiration would be more appropriate. This cold indif-ference is so strong in me, however, that I cannot conceal it in this diary, where Iwould not want to lie too much.How dare I treat them lightly? And dismiss them so cruelly that even thepain and the defeat of these people, who are, after all, close to me, become lessimportant? I do not know how to explain this to myself other than that I experi-ence their existence less strongly. . . . No, not because of distance or a long-termseparation. They have stopped being someone for me. They have stopped beingwho they were and haven’t become concrete enough in any other new existence.They are indistinct. Blurred. Incomplete. Embryonic.Communism? Anti-Communism? No, let us leave this aside for a while. Itis not a matter of your being Communists, or anti . . . it is simply that you be. To beis the minimal postulate that I set before Polish intelligentsia, Polish consciousness.You will have to exert yourselves considerably in the coming years to pass fromhalf-existence to existence and it is uncertain whether you will be successful. Untilthen, friends, neither your life nor your death will carry their full weight. And eachof you will have to earn this right to life and death separately.A few more casual comments from the reading of these newspapers.Their imagination. It is purer than it was before the war. They have puriﬁedthemselves strangely. Their imagination has ceased being sybaritic, it has beenturned in the direction of effort and battle. It is more essentially tied to energy. And1956263the healing current of the primitive imagination, to which they are closer today,has cleansed many of the distortions, oddities, and hysterias from them.Before the war, there were many people living a genteel life—the landedgentry, the bourgeoisie. They found release in the imagination, but were notdisciplined enough, and, therefore, were dirty dreamers. Those in Poland now—no. Marxism didn’t do this, poverty did.This is a better groomed imagination, but it is also impoverished. Its pov-erty, too, is not the result of a social system, of these directives and prohibitions, it isconnected with the general pauperization of the country. When the prohibitionsfall away, the nation will remain with an empty imagination, it will put its handinto an empty pocket.Their morality. They have a mouth full of morality. Nonstop. Who, there-fore, can believe in their morality?In my opinion, their morality remains in inverse proportion to their gab. Isthe morality of public life always up for discussion? In this they are pretty goodcynics. On the other hand, in personal relations, family relations, etc., there wherea certain discretion can exist, they are, surely, honorable people.Their beauty. What sort of beauty do they crave for themselves? What sortof crest? What ornaments? What poetry, what sort of grace do they seek to decoratetheir excessively drab being? Difﬁcult question. Their ofﬁcial beauty is the beautyof a battle for a new order. Yet this beauty has become rationalized and excessivelyidentiﬁed with virtue, and this deprives it of vitality. They abound in beautifulvirtues, like the Catholic Church. But where are their beautiful sins?If their imagination has not shrunk to zero, then one can assume thatbeyond the ofﬁcial poetry, another, surreptitious, private poetry is being createdand that it is the poetry of anarchy.Their modesty. These writers are uncommonly modest. Their modesty istheir savoir-vivre. It relies on the concealment of one’s arrogance. This is the onlycaution: not to get someone incensed at you.In literature such modesty is useless. Arrogance, loftiness, ambitions can-not be removed from writing because they are its motor. They must be divulgedand then they can be civilized.264AGAINST POETS
It would be more subtle of me if I did not disrupt one of the rare cere-monies which we have left. Even though we have come to doubt practicallyeverything, we still venerate the cult of Poetry and Poets and this is the only deitywhich we are not ashamed to worship with great pomp, deep bows, and inﬂatedvoice. . . . Ah, ah, Shelley! Ah, ah, S™owacki! Ah, the word of the Poet, the missionof the Poet, and the soul of the Poet! Nevertheless, I have to attack these prayersand spoil this ritual as much as I can simply in the name of elementary anger,which all errors of style, all distortion, all ﬂights from reality arouse in us. Because Iam setting out to do battle with an area especially elevated, almost celestial, I haveto watch so that I don’t ﬂoat off like a balloon and lose the ground beneath my feet.The thesis of the following essay, that almost no one likes poems and thatthe world of verse is a ﬁction and falsehood, will seem, I assume, as bold as it isfrivolous. Yet here I stand before you and declare that I don’t like poems at all andthat they even bore me. Maybe you will say that I am an impoverished ignoramus.Yet I have labored in art for a long time and its language is not completely alien tome. Nor can you use your favorite argument against me, claiming that I do notpossess a poetic sensibility, because I do possess it and to a great degree. Whenpoetry appears to me not in poems but mixed with other, more prosaic, elements,for example, in Shakespeare’s dramas, in the prose of Pascal and Dostoyevski, orsimply as a very ordinary sunset, I tremble as do other mortals. Why then does thispharmaceutical extract called ‘‘pure poetry’’ bore and weary me, especially when itappears in rhymed form? Why can’t I stand this monotonous, endlessly loftysinging? Why does rhythm and rhyme put me to sleep, why does the language ofpoets seem to me to be the least interesting language conceivable, why is thisBeauty so unattractive to me and why is it that I don’t know anything worse as style,anything more ridiculous than the manner in which poets speak about themselvesand their poetry?Against Poets265Perhaps I would be inclined to acknowledge some sort of special defect inthis regard were it not for certain experiments . . . certain scientiﬁc experiments.That accursed Bacon in art! I advise you never to try to conduct experiments in theﬁeld of art as this area does not tolerate it and all declamations on that subject canendure only on the condition that they coincide with reality. We would, for exam-ple, ﬁnd out some pretty things if we began to examine how much a person who likesBach can really like Bach, that is, is capable of grasping something of Bach and hismusic. After all, didn’t I have the pleasure (even though I can’t play ‘‘Twinkle,Twinkle, Little Star’’ on the piano) to give two rather successful concerts, whichconsisted of my pounding on that instrument any which way, after having conspiredwith a few connoisseurs beforehand to assure applause and after having announcedthat I would be playing modern music? What luck that they who carry on aboutValéry in lofty terms do not lower themselves to such confrontations. He whoapproaches our aesthetic high mass from this avenue can easily discover that hiskingdom of superﬁcial maturity is really the most immature backyard of humanity,where bluff, mystiﬁcation, snobbery, deceit, and stupidity all reign supreme. Itwould be good exercise for our rigid thinking if from time to time we thought of PaulValéry himself as an archpriest of Immaturity, a barefoot priest in underwear.I conducted the following experiments: combing speciﬁc sentences orfragments of sentences from the poetry of a certain poet, I constructed an absurdpoem and then read it to a group of genuine poetry aﬁcionados as the new work ofthe seer—to the general rapture of those poetry lovers; or I began to quiz them onspeciﬁc details as to this or that work of poetry and concluded that these poetrylovers had not even read it in its entirety. So what was going on? How could aperson be enraptured without even having read a work all the way through? Howcould one delight to such an extent in the ‘‘mathematic precision’’ of the poeticword and not notice the radical botching of its precision? How could one carry on,declaim so much on these subjects, revel in the subtleties, nuances, and thencommit such serious, such elementary mistakes? Naturally, each of these experi-ments was greeted by a great many protests and much taking of offense, and thepoetry lovers swore on all the saints that this was not how it was . . . that in fact . . .but these peas bounced off the hard crags of the Almighty Experiment.I found myself, therefore, facing the following dilemma: thousands of peo-ple write verse; hundreds of thousands adore that poetry; ﬁrst-rate geniuses have266Volume 1expressed themselves in poems; from time immemorial, Poetry has been revered;and against this mountain of praise, I, with my suspicion that the poetic mass takesplace in an absolute vacuum. Oh, if I had not known how to play with thesituation, I almost certainly would have been horriﬁed.In spite of this, however, my experiments heartened me and I began to seekthe answer to the tiresome question even more boldly: Why didn’t I like the taste ofpure poetry? Why? Wasn’t it for the very same reasons that I didn’t like sugar in apure state? Sugar is good for sweetening coffee, but not for eating by the spoonfullike gruel. In pure, rhymed poetry, the excess wearies; the excess of poetry, poeticwords, metaphors, sublimations, ﬁnally, the excess of condensation and puriﬁca-tion of all antipoetic elements, which results in poems similar to chemical products.Song is a very special form of expression. . . . Yet, behold, in the course ofcenturies, the singers have been multiplying, the singers who, while singing, areforced to assume the posture of the singer and it is this posture that in time becomesmore and more rigid. And one singer arouses another and one conﬁrms the other inan ever more stubborn frenzy of song, ha, they are no longer singing for the otherpeople but for one another; and between them, on a path of unceasing rivalry, aconstant perfecting of themselves in the singing, a pyramid is created whose peakreaches the heavens and which we admire from below, from earth, looking upward.What was supposed to have been a momentary ﬂight of prose became a program, asystem, a profession—and today one is a Poet, the way one is an engineer or a doctor.The poem has swelled to monstrous proportions so that we no longer control it; itrules us. Poets have become slaves and we could describe the poet as a being whocan no longer express himself as much as someone who must express—a Poem.Yet there can be no more important assignment than for one to expresshimself. We should never lose sight of the truth: that all style, every distinct attitudeforms itself through elimination and is, basically, an impoverishment. Because ofthis, we should not allow any attitude whatsoever to reduce our potential, becom-ing a gag—when it’s a matter of so artiﬁcial, no, of almost pretentious posture as‘‘singer,’’ then that is all the more reason that we should be especially alert. We,however, up to now anyway, have spent a lot more time and effort perfectingourselves in this or that style, or in this or that position, rather than maintaining acertain inner freedom and independence from them, in order to work out the rightrelationship between ourselves and our position. It would seem that Form is aAgainst Poets267value in itself independently of whether or not it enriches or impoverishes us. Weperfect art frantically but the question, to what degree has it maintained its bondwith me, doesn’t seem to concern us at all. We attend to Poetry, not noticing thatwhat is beautiful is not necessarily ‘‘becoming.’’ If, therefore, we do not wantculture to lose all contact with the human individual, we must interrupt ourdiligent creativity from time to time and check to see if that which we are creatingexpresses us.There exist two contrary types of humanism: one, which we could call thereligious, tries to send man to his knees before a work of human culture—it forcesus to adore and respect Music or Poetry, for example, or the State or Divinity; andthe other, a more difﬁcult current of our spirit which strives to restore man’ssovereignty and independence in relation to the Gods and Muses, which areultimately man’s creation. In this second instance, the word ‘‘art’’ is written with asmall letter. And it is beyond doubt that a style that is capable of encompassingboth of these tendencies is fuller, more authentic, and more closely reﬂects theantinomies of our nature than a style that expresses only one of these two poles ofour emotions. Of all artists, poets are people who fall to their knees most persis-tently—they pray most fervently—they are priests par excellence and ex professio,and Poetry in this understanding simply becomes celebration. It is exactly thisexclusivity that causes the style and position of poets to be so drastically unsatisfac-tory, so incomplete.Let us speak a moment more about style. We said that an artist must expresshimself. But, in expressing himself, he must also take care that his manner ofspeaking be in harmony with his real situation in the world and he must render notonly his relationship to the world, but also the relationship of the world to him. If,being a coward, I take on a heroic tone, I am committing a stylistic mistake. But if Iexpress myself as if I were respected and loved by everyone, while in reality peopleneither respect nor like me, I am also making a stylistic mistake. If we want to havean idea of the real situation in the world, we cannot avoid a confrontation withrealities that are different from ours. A man who has formed himself only incontact with people similar to himself, who is a product of only his milieu, willhave a worse style than he who has come to know various milieus and people. Andthus in poets not only their piety irritates us, that complete surrender to Poetry, butalso their ostrich politics in relation to reality: for they defend themselves against268Volume 1reality, they don’t want to see or acknowledge it, they intentionally work them-selves into a stupor which is not strength but weakness.Don’t poets create for poets? Don’t they look only for disciples, that is, forpeople like themselves? Aren’t these poems merely the product of a certain, tight-knit group? Aren’t they hermetic? Of course, I am not accusing them of being‘‘difﬁcult’’—I am not demanding that they write ‘‘in a way comprehensible toeveryone’’ or that they step under thatched roofs. This would be equal to havingthem surrender the most real values such as consciousness, reason, a greatersensitivity, and a more profound knowledge about life and the world in order tolower themselves to an average level, oh, no, no art which respects itself will everagree to that! He who is reasonable, subtle, noble, and profound must speak rea-sonably, subtly, and profoundly, and he who is sophisticated must speak in a sophis-ticated way—for superiority exists and it does not exist to lower itself. It is not bad,therefore, that contemporary poems are not accessible to just anybody, but it is badthat they are born of a one-sided, tight, coexistence of identical worlds, identicalpeople. Why I myself am an author who stubbornly defends his level, yet at thesame time (I bring this to everyone’s attention so as not to be accused of cultivatingthe type of art which I am ﬁghting), my works do not forget, even for a moment,that beyond my world exist still other worlds. Any even if I do not write for people, Iwrite as someone who is threatened by them, or, too, dependent on them, peoplecreated by people. Nor did it ever occur to me to assume the pose of an ‘‘artist,’’ a‘‘writer,’’ a mature, recognized writer; rather I appear exactly as a candidate for anartist, I am he whose only desire is to be mature—in an unceasing and ﬁercecollision with everything that interferes with my development. My art has shapeditself not in confrontation with a group of people related to me, but in relation tothe enemy and confrontation with the enemy.But poets? Can a poet’s poem survive if it falls not into the hands of a friendof the poet, but into the hands of an enemy, a nonpoet? Just as all other statements,a poem should be conceived and made real in such a way as to bring no disgrace toits creator even if it doesn’t appeal to anyone. Furthermore, poems shouldn’tdisgrace their creator even when they do not appeal to the poet himself. For nopoet is exclusively a poet and in each poet lives a nonpoet, who does not sing anddoes not like singing . . . and man is something broader than a poet. The style bornamong confessors of the same religion, however, dies in contact with a mob ofAgainst Poets269unbelievers; it is incapable of defending or ﬁghting itself; it is incapable of real life;this is a constricted style.Allow me to present the following scene. . . . Imagine that in a group ofseveral people, one rises and begins to sing. This singing bores the majority oflisteners, but the singer does not want to acknowledge this fact. No, he acts as if hewere captivating; he demands that all fall to their knees before this Beauty; hedemands a ruthless recognition of his role as Seer; and even though no oneattaches great importance to his singing, he acquires a mien as if his word haddecisive meaning for the world. Full of belief in his Poetic Mission, he caststhunderbolts, thunders, roars, and goes crazy in a vacuum. What is more, he doesnot want to admit to himself or others that his singing bores, torments, wearies evenhimself—because he doe not express himself freely or naturally or directly, only ina form that has long lost its contact with direct human feelings and is inheritedfrom other poets. Behold, he not only vaunts Poetry, he is also enamored of it;being a Poet, he adores the greatness and the importance of the Poet; he not onlydemands that others fall to their knees before him, he, too, falls to his knees beforehimself. Could one not say of such a man that he took too great a burden upon hisshoulders? For he not only believes in the power of poetry, but he also forceshimself to this faith; he not only offers himself to others, he forces them to con-sume this divine gift, like a host. How, in such a hermetic state of the soul, is acrack—through which life could tear into the inside—to be found? We are nottalking about some third-rate singer; no, this also pertains to the most famous andthe best poets.If only a poet could treat his singing as a mania or ritual; if only he wouldsing as those who must sing even though they know they sing in a vacuum. If,instead of a proud ‘‘I, the poet,’’ he were capable of saying these words with shameor with fear . . . even with revulsion . . . but no! A poet has to worship the Poet!This helplessness in the face of reality, therefore, characterizes in a devas-tating way the style and attitude of poets. A man who ﬂees reality, however, ﬁnds noballast in anything . . . he becomes a plaything of the elements. The minute thepoets lost sight of a concrete human being and became transﬁxed with abstractPoetry, nothing could keep them from rolling down the incline into the chasm ofthe absurd. Everything began to grow in and of itself. Metaphor, deprived of allrein, took the bit in its mouth and let loose to such an extent that today there270Volume 1is nothing in poems except metaphors. Language has become ritualistic—those‘‘roses,’’ ‘‘dusks,’’ ‘‘longings,’’ or ‘‘pains’’ that at one time had a certain freshnesshave become, as a result of overuse, an empty sound—this pertains as much to themore modern ‘‘semaphores’’ or other ‘‘spirals.’’ The narrowing of the language isaccompanied by a narrowing of style, which has led to a state in which poemstoday are nothing more than a few insistent combinations of a miserly dictionary.As the narrowness became increasingly narrower, an unreined Beauty becamemore and more Beautiful, Profundity more Profound, Nobility more and moreNoble, Purity more and more Pure. Because, on the one hand, the poem, deprivedof all brakes, inﬂated itself to the limits of a gigantic poem (similar to those forestsreally known only by a few explorers), and on the other, began condensing itself todimensions too synthetic and homeopathic. Poets also began submitting them-selves to various experiments and discoveries with a mien of frightening initiation—and nothing is capable of restraining this boring orgy. It is not a matter of man’screativity for man, but of a ritual completed before an altar. And for every tenpoems, at least one will be devoted to the worship of the power of the Poetic Wordor a gloriﬁcation of the Poet’s vocation.Let us agree that these pathological symptoms are characteristic not just ofpoets. This religious attitude has also wrought great devastation in prose, too, if wetake such works as Broch’s Death of Virgil or Ulysses or some of Kafka’s work, thenwe will have the same sensation—that the ‘‘excellence’’ and ‘‘greatness’’ of theseworks realize themselves in a vacuum, that they belong to those books whicheveryone knows are great . . . but which, nevertheless, are somehow remote,inaccessible, and cold . . . for they were written in a kneeling position with thoughtnot about the reader but Art or some other abstraction. This prose was born of thevery same spirit which illuminates poets; it is essentially a ‘‘poetic prose.’’If, casting aside the works, we concern ourselves with the persons of thepoets and the little world that these persons create along with their followers andacolytes, then we begin to lack even more air and space. Poets not only write forpoets, but they also praise each other and honor each other. This world, or rathermicroworld, does not differ much from other hermetic and specialized micro-worlds: chess players consider chess the height of human creativity, they have theirhierarchies, they speak of Capablanca with a reverence equal to that used by poetswhen speaking of Mallarmé, and one conﬁrms the other in the feeling of his ownAgainst Poets271importance. Yet chess players have no pretensions to a universal role and thatwhich can be forgiven in chess players becomes unforgivable in poets. As a conse-quence of this isolation, everything becomes inﬂated, and even mediocre poetspuff themselves up to apocalyptic dimensions and trivial problems assume out-rageous proportions. Let us recall at least the terrible polemics on the subject ofassonances, the tone in which this issue was discussed. It seemed to them that thefate of humanity depended on whether or not ‘‘could’’ could be rhymed with‘‘wood.’’ This is what happens when the mob corporate spirit gains an upper handover the universal spirit.Another no less compromising fact is the number of poets. To the excessesjust touched on above should be added the excess of seers. These ultrademocraticﬁgures explode the aristocratic and proud fortress of poetry from within—and, ofcourse, it is quite amusing when one sees them all together at some sort of con-gress: what a throng of exceptional beings! Yet isn’t art triumphing in a vacuuman ideal place for those who are nothing, whose empty personality compensateswith raptures in these straitened forms? Really funny are the criticisms, the littlearticles, aphorisms, essays, which turn up in the press on the subject of poetry. Thisis gibberish, but bombastic gibberish, so naive and childish that it is difﬁcultto believe that the people wielding the pen did not feel the ridiculousness ofthis publicism. Those stylists have still not understood that one is not allowed towrite about poetry in a poetic tone and their newspapers are bursting with suchpoetic lucubrations. Great is the ridiculousness, too, that accompanies the recitals,contests, and demonstrations, but it is probably not worth going into great detailabout this.I believe I have explained more or less why rhymed verse does not arrestme. And why poets who gave themselves up entirely to Poetry and subordinatedthemselves and their own essence to this Institution, forgetting about the existenceof the concrete man and closing their eyes to reality, found themselves (centuriesago) in a catastrophic situation. In spite of appearing triumphant. In spite of thecomplete pomp of the situation.Still I have to parry a certain accusation.One can explain the incredible simplemindedness with which poets (peo-ple who are usually neither stupid nor naive) defend themselves when one ﬁndsfault with their art only by a voluntary blindness. Many of them seek rescue in the272Volume 1pronouncement that poems are written for one’s own pleasure as if all of theirbehavior didn’t undermine this claim. There are those who maintain in all serious-ness that they write for the people and that their fantastic charades constitute thespiritual nourishment of the simple folk. All, however, believe irrevocably in thesocial resonance of poetry and it will be difﬁcult for them to understand how theycan be attacked on these grounds. They will say:—What! Can you doubt this? Doyou not see the masses of people that attend our readings? The many editions ofour volumes? The number of studies, articles, works written about us? The adula-tion with which famous poets are surrounded? It is you, sir, who do not wish to seethat which is. . . .What should I say in reply? That all of these are—illusions. That it is truethat crowds attend the readings, but that it is also true that even a very educatedlistener cannot understand a poem declaimed at a reading. How many times have Iattended these hopeless sessions, at which one poem is recited after another—andeach of them must be read at least three times with the greatest attention in order tomore or less decode its contents. As far as the editions are concerned, we know thatthousands of books are bought never to be read. As we have said, poets write aboutpoetry. Admiration? Don’t horses at the races arouse an even greater interest—butwhat does this sporting vein, in which we watch all rivalry and all these ambitiousaspirations—national and other—that accompany these races, have to do withgenuine artistic emotion?Nevertheless, this answer, even though it is correct, would not be adequate.The problem of our coexistence with art is much more profound and difﬁcult.There is no doubt—in my understanding at least—that if we want to understandsomething of this at all, we have to break completely with the far too simplethought that ‘‘art captivates us’’ and that ‘‘we delight in art.’’ No, art fascinates usonly to a certain degree, and the delights it provides are doubtful. . . . Can it beotherwise, if intimacy with great art is tiring, a difﬁcult intimacy with a moremature people, with a wider range and a more powerful sensibility? We do notdelight in this, rather we try to delight in this . . . and we don’t understand . . . we tryto understand. . . .How superﬁcial is thought, for which the complicated phenomenon isreduced to the simple formula: art fascinates because it is beautiful—ah, there areso many snobs . . . but I am not a snob. I am frank in admitting it when somethingAgainst Poets273does not appeal to me—says this simplicity (of soul), and it seems to it that every-thing is taken care of.When, in fact, it is here that one feels factors having nothing to do withaesthetics. Do you think that if we hadn’t been forced to admire art in school, wewould have so much ready admiration for it at a later age? Do you think that if ourentire cultural organization did not impose art on us, that we would be interestedin it at all? Isn’t it our need for myth and adoration that expresses itself in thisadoration of ours and don’t we, by adoring the superior, elevate ourselves? And arethese feelings of amazement and admiration born ‘‘of us’’ or ‘‘between us’’? If thereis a storm of applause at a concert, it does not necessarily mean that each of theclapping persons was fascinated. One timid applause provokes another—mutuallyexciting themselves until ﬁnally there arises a situation in which each person has toadjust himself internally to the collective madness. Everybody ‘‘behaves’’ as if hewere enthralled although no one is ever ‘‘really’’ enthralled to this extent.It would be a mistake worthy of pity if we demanded of poems, or of anyother art, that they should be, oh, simply, a source of human delight. And if welook around in the world of poets and their admirers from this perspective, then allof its absurdities and ridiculous sides will seem justiﬁed: because apparently, this ishow it should be and it is in harmony with the natural order of things that art, justas enthrallment, which it arouses, be the work of the collective spirit, rather thanthe direct reaction of the individual.This is not true, however. Even this conception is incapable of rescuingpoets or making the life and reality of their poetry blush. If this is how reality reallyis, then they, at any rate, don’t realize it. For them, this simply happens: the singersings and the listener, enthralled, listens. It is certain that if they were capable ofrecognizing these truths and drawing all the appropriate conclusions, then theirattitude to song would have to change radically. Nevertheless, rest easy: nothingwill ever change among poets. And don’t succumb to the illusion that in the face ofthese collective powers, which distort our individual sensitivity, they will evidencea will to resist—as if art were not a ﬁction and a ceremony, but a genuine coexis-tence of man with man. No, these monks prefer to humble themselves!Monks? This does not mean that I am an opponent of God or his numer-ous orders. Yet even religion dies the moment it changes into ritual. We sacriﬁceauthenticity and the weight of our existence too easily at these altars.274SIENKIEWICZ
I am reading Sienkiewicz. Distressing reading. We say: this is pretty bad,and we read on. We say: what ﬂimsy stuff, yet we can’t tear ourselves away. Weshout: insufferable opera! and we read on, mesmerized.What a powerful genius!—and there has probably never been such a ﬁrst-rate second-rate writer. This is a second-rate Homer, a ﬁrst-rate Dumas. It isdifﬁcult to ﬁnd a comparable example of the captivation of an entire nation, or of amore mesmerizing hold on the imagination of the masses in the history of litera-ture. Sienkiewicz, that magician, that seducer, stuck a Kmicic and Wo™odyjowksiand Great Hetman into our heads and corked them up. From then on, nothingelse could really appeal to a Pole, nothing that was anti-Sienkiewicz, nothing thatwas pro-Sienkiewicz. This corking up of our imagination resulted in our experi-encing this century as if we had been on another planet and not much modernthought reached us. Am I exaggerating? If the history of literature accepted theinﬂuence of art on people as a criterion, Sienkiewicz (that demon, that catastropheof our collective mind, that pest) should occupy ﬁve times more space in it thanMickiewicz. Who read Mickiewicz of his own accord, of his own unforced will,who was familiar with S™owacki? Krasi ´ nski, Przybyszewski, Wyspia ´ nski . . . was thisanything more than an imposed, a forced literature? Sienkiewicz is wine whichreally intoxicated us and here our hearts beat quickly . . . and no matter whom youtalked to, a doctor, worker, professor, landowner, clerk, you always came uponSienkiewicz, upon Sienkiewicz as the ultimate, most intimate secret of Polishtaste, the Polish ‘‘dream about beauty.’’ Often this was a masked Sienkiewicz, or anunconfessed Sienkiewicz, shamefully concealed or sometimes even forgotten—but always Sienkiewicz. Why were books written and published after Sienkiewicz—which were no longer Sienkiewicz’s books?In order to understand our secret affair (for it is compromising) with Sien-kiewicz, it is necessary to touch a slippery issue, namely, the problem of ‘‘produc-Sienkiewicz275ing beauty.’’ To be fetching, attractive, alluring—is the desire not just of womanand, perhaps, the weaker and more threatened a nation is, the more painfully itfeels the need for beauty, which is a challenge to the world: look, don’t persecuteme, love me! Beauty is also necessary to be able to fall in love with oneself and thatwhich is one’s own—and it is in the name of this love that one is able to resist theworld. Therefore, nations turn to their artists in order to extract beauty from themand this is where French, English, Polish, or Russian beauty comes from. Hasanyone ever compiled a history of Polish beauty through the centuries? It would bedifﬁcult to ﬁnd a more important subject, as your beauty delineates not only yourtaste but your entire relationship to the world, certain things become unaccept-able not because you should condemn them, but because they are ‘‘unbecoming,’’because ‘‘they detract from your type,’’ because with them, you would not be ableto realize the beauty which you crave and on which you model yourself. Thus awoman who models herself on a child or a scatterbrain does not want, does notlike, does not love thinking; a lancer, on the other hand, has to like whiskey, eventhough he may not like it; an adolescent must love cigarettes.Sienkiewicz’s salon de beauté is the result of a long process and, I repeat, wewill understand little of his mind-boggling triumphs until we have a look at Polishadventures with beauty during the course of recent centuries. Take a look at oursixteenth- and seventeenth-century literature and you will be convinced that it hasalmost always equated beauty with virtue. There was no room in it for beauty bornexclusively of life; on the contrary, life here turned out to be a bridled morality andonly a virtuous youth, decent and god-fearing, could come to know aestheticcanonization in art. This is exactly what does not appeal to us today. This bores us,it seems neuter, unattractive, for virtue in itself is uninteresting and predictable.Virtue is settling the matter, that is, death. Sin is life. Virtue can be vital only as avictory over sin, which is original and, what’s more, something that separates anddelineates us. Human nature manifests itself in sin, in a vital expansion, and hewho has not known such a period of vitality, who from childhood was only vir-tuous, will not know much about himself. The blasphemous thought that Hellcould exist beyond Virtue was inconceivable to the literature of that day. Whichinevitably had to lead to the ossiﬁcation of form. The type of Pole which literatureand art proposed, not being saturated enough with sin, attached adequately to life,had to become an isolated formula. Isn’t this what is happening today with the276Volume 1ofﬁcial Bolshevik beauty of the young, radiant worker with a smile on his lips,hammer in hand, and gaze directed into the luminous future, which bores with itsexcess of virtue? This is the source of our incredible, adventurous eighteenthcentury, the almost brilliant crisis of Polish beauty, which put us face-to-face withour Ugliness, our Proﬂigacy . . . a century of sclerotic, senile old stiffening and atthe same time, a dull unruliness, when the armistice between form and instincthad created a chasm . . . probably the deepest which has ever shown itself to ouridyllic spirit. Never before or since have we been closer to rubbing up against helland any thought about Poland and the Poles is not worth much if it bypasses theperiod of Saxon scurrility. But what exactly happened? What happened was thatthe Pole suddenly felt himself the caricature of a Pole. The Jesuit schools could notprovide a more vital beauty, therefore, desperate with a tormenting sense of ourown awfulness and ridiculousness, we tottered into sclerosis and farce.Undoubtedly the profound imbecility of our behavior during that periodderived from, among other things, an unsatisﬁed desire for beauty. The Poland ofthat day was a nation which simply did not know how to be beautiful. At the bottomof that quadrille of obese squires one can divine a despair which results from anincapacity to reach the sources of living grace; this is the tragedy of beings forced tobe satisﬁed with such surrogates as ceremony, honors, distinctions and to ﬁndoutlets in solemn ritual, while gluttony, debauchery, and pride are boundless.What irreparable harm! That this Saxon burlesque did not get carried out to itsultimate conclusions! For the self-torment in ugliness, in stupidity, would have ledus most likely to the higher forms of beauty and understanding—this tormentingconﬂict with form, which became hostile to us, could have wonderfully perfectedour sensitivity to form—and, who knows, maybe we would have gained a betterunderstanding of this incurable disharmony in this way, the disharmony whichexists between a man and his form, his ‘‘style’’—and this thought would haveallowed us to ﬁnally notice the existence of Form as such and would have resultednot so much in the ‘‘Polish style’’ as much as in our relationship, as people, to thatstyle having become our highest concern. Yes, perhaps we would have madeimportant discoveries, perhaps we would have arrived at fertile, new ideas if . . . ifnot for Mickiewicz! Yes! Mickiewicz soothed our pains, taught us a new beauty,which for many long years became the obligatory beauty and resulted in our beingcontent with ourselves again.Sienkiewicz277If that had really been good work! . . . But real beauty is not attained bypassing over ugliness in silence. You will not be able to do much with your body ifshyness does not allow you to undress completely. And virtue does not rely onconcealing sins, but on overcoming them; real virtue not only does not fear sin, butseeks it—as it is the reason for its being. Art is wonderfully capable of magnifyingthe beauty of a man or a nation, under the condition that we leave it completefreedom of action. But Mickiewicz, a sage as merciful as he was shy, as pious as hewas timid, preferred not to undress all the way and his all-encompassing goodnessfeared looking truth in the eyes. He was the greatest revelation of that Polishaesthetics which does not like ‘‘to dabble’’ in dirt, or cause anyone any pain. YetMickiewicz’s great weakness consisted of his being the national poet, that is, hisidentifying with and expressing the nation, whereby he became incapable of see-ing the nation from the outside, as something ‘‘existing in the world.’’ Deprived of abase of support in this external world and in his own being, he could not move thenation from its haunches and in these conditions did something which he couldnot afford to do, that is, provided us with a beauty which appealed to our nationalinterests at a given moment. Because we had lost our independence and wereweak, he decorated our weakness with the plumes of Romanticism, he turnedPoland into the Christ of nations, he opposed our Christian virtue to the lawless-ness of the partitioners and sang the praises of our beauteous landscapes.Once again virtue became the foundation of our beauty—and Poles readilysubmitted themselves to this bit of cosmetic unaware that it takes place at the costof life. Mickiewicz, the national poet of a conquered people, a people with areduced vitality, was basically afraid of life, he was not one of those artists who teasethe bull, who provoke, who stoke reality to a white heat, just to bring aesthetics andmorality under control. No—he was instead one of those teachers and educatorswho prefer to avoid temptations, while Western art was an endless excitationand expansion. Mickiewicz’s art is a rather careful braking, an avoidance of ‘‘evilthoughts’’ and exciting views. How would our development have looked if a starother than Mickiewicz’s had appeared in our sky: a man equally outstanding andlofty, who would not have surrendered himself to the service of the nation, but,proudly contemptuous of all our poverty, all the necessities of our slavery, wouldhave tried to reach Beauty as a free man, a man spiritually free. But no such star—of the Goethe variety—appeared to us at the right moment and today it is probably278Volume 1too late . . . for problems have their chronology and right now other things weighon our hearts.In order to understand how in a given historical period the feeling ofbeauty prevails, one must ﬁrst take into account society’s relation to youth. It ischaracteristic that in the poetry of the creator of ‘‘Ode to Youth’’ the beauty of theyouth is still subordinated to a ‘‘mature’’ beauty—one could say that this is still aliterature of the fathers and it is not the young man that fascinates Mickiewicz, it isthe man or a young man having the requirements for a man. In spite of itsromanticism, we will not ﬁnd in all of Polish art even a pinch of that exaltation ofyouth with which the art of Greece, Renaissance painting, or Romeo and Juliet issaturated . . . no, here youth is always stiﬂed, here a bit is clamped on the horse ofyouth. . . . What then was the predicament of a Polish young man in the Mickie-wiczian period? Finding no afﬁrmation of his twenty years in any art, for the gracewhich nature had endowed him, he could be beautiful only as a romantic son ofdefeat, or as a Pole, or as someone whose beauty—the beauty of virtue, merit—begins only after thirty. But even this beauty of virtue, having God or Nation as itssource, turned out to be immeasurably narrow in the face of so many variousbeauties which gradually made their appearance in the West—for there they beganto notice that there exists a beauty of ignominy and baseness, the pagan beauty ofsin, the beauty of Goethe and the ill-boding gleam of Shakespeare’s and Balzac’sworlds, and beauties which were to ﬁnd their expression in Baudelaire, Wilde,Ruskin, Poe, Dostoyevski, but nothing of this Western striving for the enrichmentof the gamut of human beauty penetrated the soul of the young man who wasdestined only for the role and function of the ‘‘virtuous son of Poland.’’ If, therefore,carried away by instinct and temperament, he made his way into the jungle ofthose forbidden charms, it was always on his own, without a guide, left to his ownunsophisticated, murky instincts.Let us return to Sienkiewicz.The dilemma virtue/vitality remained unresolved, therefore, and rankledall the more because unofﬁcially in all of the literature in post-Mickiewicz times.Nowhere does it appear in a more caricatured manner than in Kraszewski andstudies of this author would cast a great deal of light onto our psyche. We were sub-mitted to a narrow aesthetics and within this framework we should have paintedour own face. The new generation was increasingly irked by the fact that this civilSienkiewicz279beauty provided outlets that were too narrow for the temperament and they soughta unity of virtue with beauty and grace, to create a type of Pole who would know notonly how to pray but how to dance. One could say that we were seeking theopportunity to sin, yet paralyzed by a centuries-long tradition, we sought onlymolliﬁed sin, sin which would not be base or ignominious or ugly or horrible . . .yes, our need was for likable sin, which would not repel anyone. Sienkiewiczsensed this secret need wonderfully and this paved the road for his triumph. Thetype of Pole, inherited from Mickiewicz and, in spite of everything, of a high class,made him easier, more acceptable and more attractive. He peppered virtue withsin, he coated sin with sugar and was able to concoct a sweetish liqueur, not toostrong but exciting, of the type most appealing to women.Likable sin, decent sin, charming sin, ‘‘pure’’ sin—behold the specialty ofthis kitchen. Not the Roman Skrzetuski but the sinner Kmicic is the typical Sien-kiewicz hero. The Kmicices and Winicjuszes are allowed to sin on the conditionthat the sin comes from an excess of vital forces and a pure heart. Sienkiewiczrealized this liberation of sin, which had long been necessary for Polish develop-ment . . . but on what a level! The difference between a real aspiration to beautyand coquetry is that in the ﬁrst case we want to appeal to ourselves and in thesecond case, it is enough to charm others. For years, Poles have been practicing anonobjective beauty, always in the name of some other, higher, right; why then, isit strange that Mickiewicz, who was, in spite of everything, in great measureobjective and powerful, was slowly transformed into Sienkiewicz, who was theopen desire to please at all cost? First, he desired to appeal to the reader. Second,he desired that one Pole appeal to another Pole and that the nation appeal to allPoles. Third, he desired that the nation appeal to other nations.In this net of absorbing seduction, it is obvious that value disappears andthat the external effect becomes decisive—and the ease with which Sienkiewiczattains the appearance of value is worthy of amazement and is immensely charac-teristic. If his theater is full of titanic ﬁgures, with the power and glory of the GreatHetman and Wojewoda of Wilno type rarely met with elsewhere, then it is exactlybecause this is pure theater and pure acting. The skills this cook manifests inpreparing soups of many glories for us are exactly those characteristic of a mediocreman who plays with values. The tragedy of genuine superiority is that it does notwant to lower its ﬂight for anything, that it will ﬁght to the death to maintain its280Volume 1level, as it does not know how to and cannot get rid of itself—and that is why anauthentic superiority is always creative, that is, it transforms others in its ownimage. Sienkiewicz, on the other hand, surrenders himself entirely to the serviceof the average imagination, and by resigning from the spirit, nevertheless doesnot resign from talent and, in this way, arrives at an archsensual art, based onsatisfying the unrealized tendencies of the masses, and becomes a peddler ofpleasant dreams . . . to the degree that the awestruck mediocrity exclaims: What agenius! And it is true that this is, in a very special sense, a brilliant art, brilliantexactly because it derives from the desire to please and enchant; and hence thatmarvel of narration—the intuition when it is a matter of avoiding that which tires,bores, which does not amuse—that sauce, that color, that melody. . . . A rare genius,but also a somewhat embarrassing one, a genius of those somewhat embarrassingdreams to which we succumb before falling asleep, a genius of whom it is betternot to boast abroad. And that is why, in spite of all his glory, Sienkiewicz has neverbeen given his due. The Polish intelligentsia delighted in him ‘‘as bedside reading’’but on ofﬁcial turf, it preferred to mention the names of other, inﬁnitely lesstalented but far more serious artists like ˙Zeromski or Wyspia ´ nski. . . .For he is a genius of ‘‘easy beauty.’’ With terrifying efﬁcacy he makeseverything he touches shallow; a very speciﬁc harmonizing of life with spirit takesplace and all the antinomies with which a serious literature bleeds become blurred,and as a result, we get novels which adolescents can read without blushing. Whydoesn’t the endless torture and atrocity in which the Trilogy or Quo Vadis aboundnot arouse a protest in sensitive virgins who faint reading Dostoyevski? Because it isobvious that Sienkiewicz’s tortures are described ‘‘for pleasure.’’ In his world evenphysical pain becomes a piece of candy. His world is threatening, powerful, splen-did, it has all the attributes of a real world, except that the label ‘‘for entertainment’’has been afﬁxed to it, as a result of which it does not horrify.Yet the game would not be so bad in and of itself, because it is nowherewritten that fun, coquetry, daydreaming, is forbidden . . . if that playing with valuesdid not take on the appearance of a cult of values. No one forbids selling a cat, butone should not sell a cat in a sack. If we asked Sienkiewicz: Why do you beautifyhistory? Why do you simplify people? Why do you feed Poles the steak of naiveillusions? Why do you put the conscience to sleep, stiﬂe thought, and impedeSienkiewicz281progress?—the answer is ready and contained in the last words of the Trilogy: tocheer the heart. In addition, a nation is its own justiﬁcation. But, outside of thenation, there is also God. For this work as conceived by Sienkiewicz and hisadmirers is writing that is moral par excellence, based solidly on a Catholic world-view, a ‘‘pure’’ literature. From which it turns out that Sienkiewicz’s starting pointsharmonize with our centuries-long tradition: everything that is written is written inthe name of the Nation and God, God and the Nation.It is easy to notice that these two concepts—God and Nation—are notentirely reconcilable, or at any rate are not conducive to appearing one next to theother. God is absolute morality, and a nation is a group of people with speciﬁcaspirations, ﬁghting for its daily existence . . . we must decide, therefore, if thehighest right is our moral feeling or the interests of our group. It is certain that inMickiewicz as well as in Sienkiewicz, God became subordinated to the nation andvirtue was primarily an instrument in the battle for a collective existence. Theweakness of our individual morality, our stubborn herd instinct in time had toplunge us into a more and more distinct laicism, and in truth Sienkiewicz’s virtuesbecome outright pretexts for beauty; he is like a woman who maintains purity inthought and deed not to please God, but because instinct assures her that it pleasesmen. Therefore, Sienkiewicz is a Catholic writer only superﬁcially and his lovelyvirtue is a hundred miles away from true, painful, ugly Catholic virtue, which is acategorical rejection of easy attractions—his virtue not only harmonizes with thebody, it also decorates it like a smile. That is why Sienkiewicz’s literature can bedeﬁned as a proposal for ‘‘an uncomplicated life,’’ a disregarding of absolute valuesin the name of living.Never has Gide’s wonderful saying that ‘‘the road to hell is paved with goodintentions,’’ turned out to be more apt than in this case . . . and the demonicconsequences of the nobility and honesty—there is no reason to doubt this—ofSienkiewicz’s intentions were not long in appearing. His ‘‘beauty’’ became theideal set of pajamas for all of those who did not want to gape at their own hideousnakedness. The gentry-landowning social stratum, living on their estates, with thatsimpliﬁed life of theirs and being, in the majority, a desperate band of slovenlydolts, ﬁnally found its ideal style and, what goes with it, attained complete satisfac-tion with itself. It soaked up this pleasure. The aristocracy, the bourgeoisie, the282Volume 1clergy, the army, and every single element which wanted to ridicule its way out ofconfrontations that were too difﬁcult, and patriotism, Polish patriotism, so lazy andbrisk in its beginnings and bloody and enormous in its effects, got drunk onSienkiewicz’s Poland until it passed out. Various countesses, wives of engineersand lawyers, female citizens of town and country ﬁnally found the ‘‘woman-Pole’’who could embody the idealism supported by their husbands’ money and polishedby their servants, and from then on these priestesses and guardians, these buxomcountry lasses, these Ole ´ nki and Ba´ ski became waterproof and inaccessible to all ofexternal reality—as knowledge interfered with their ‘‘purity,’’ for their beauty con-sisted of exactly their impenetrability. But, what was worse, the whole soul of thenation became insensitive to the external world, as happens with dreamers whoprefer not to ruin their dreams. And perhaps not because the stubborn revisionismbursting with a new Marxism, Freudianism, or surrealism of the West did notinterest the mass of Poles, but because in their heart of hearts, they knew that theirnotion of themselves, embodied in Sienkiewicz, was like the armor of Don Qui-xote, which is better off not being put to the test. After all, they did not like that stuff,they found no pleasure in that, their knight-lancer’s soul had fallen in love withsomething else, O mighty art! Alas, a certain style determines the emotional possi-bilities of the nation, making it blind and deaf to all else, determining its mostconcealed tastes to the degree that 90% of the world becomes inedible to it.Naturally, Sienkiewicz did not accomplish this alone.As we saw, he had his predecessors; he also had his followers, that is, awhole Sienkiewicz school in literature and art.
BBB
From the above, bird’s-eye view of our nation’s adventures with beauty, itwould appear that a more real, more authentic Polish beauty does not exist. Nei-ther beauty, nor form, nor style. Let us not deceive ourselves even for an instantinto believing that the literature and art that we wield today is really a style. Forstyle, form, and beauty can only be the work of a people who are spiritually free, apeople who aspire to this goal with complete ruthlessness, who are bold andpassionate in the search, in order to treat with contempt all outside considerationsand to bare us in a way we have not ever been bared. It is only then that Poles willSienkiewicz283acquiesce to reality and will settle down to themselves with the appropriate free-dom. We will attain neither Polish beauty nor virtue until we dare reveal Polish sinsand Polish ugliness.But let us not underrate Sienkiewicz. It is up to us whether he becomes aninstrument of truth or falsehood and whether or not his shameful work leads us toself-exposure in greater measure than any other. The unmasking denuding powerof Sienkiewicz consists of exactly his moving along the line of least resistance,insofar as he is all pleasure, an uncommitted reveling in cheap daydreams. If wecease seeing a teacher and master in him, if we understand that this is our intimatedreamer, the shameful teller of dreams, then his books will grow for us to the size ofart with a spontaneous character, an analysis of which will lead us into the murkydark recesses of our personality. If we treated Sienkiewicz’s writing in this way, asan outlet for our instincts, desires, secret aspirations, we would see truths in himabout ourselves that would perhaps make our hair stand on end. Sienkiewicz, as noother writer, leads us into those crannies of our soul where our Polish escapingfrom life and our Polish circumvention of truth take place. Our ‘‘superﬁciality,’’our ‘‘lightness,’’ our basically irresponsible, childish attitude to life and culture, ourlack of belief in the existence of a complete reality (probably resulting from the factthat while we are not really Europe, neither are we Asia) manifests itself here all themore violently the more we are ashamed of it. If modern Polish thought does notattain the appropriate acuity, then horriﬁed by this discovery and desiring to be likethe West (or East) at any price, it will begin to persecute these ‘‘faults’’ in us andmake over our nature—which will lead to one more grotesquerie. If, however, wewill be sensible enough to draw the consequences for ourselves, we will undoubt-edly discover some unforeseen and unexploited possibilities and we will be capa-ble of providing ourselves with a beauty quite different from what we have knownup to now.Discussing modern Polish thought and development when we are gagged,when we live in conditions of utter poverty and backwardness, might appear to benothing but empty talk. Not so! Existence is a complicated thing. Behind the mainevents mental work continues. Not for a second has the life in us been extin-guished that is calculated for the long run; it simply cannot get to the surface. InPoland today, more than ever, the Polish masses are choking in the muzzle of an284Volume 1artiﬁcial aesthetics imposed on them in the name of proletarian virtue. What ismore, never have we been more torn between East and West. These two worlds,destroying each other right before our eyes, create an emptiness in us which wewill be able to ﬁll only with our own contents. Sooner or later, the real devil willappear to us and only then will we know which God we must worship.Volume 2This page intentionally left blank 2871957
I
I have not been completely understood (I am referring to the articles thatare appearing in Poland on the subject of Ferdydurke) or rather they have extractedfrom me only what is ‘‘timely’’ and corresponds to their current history and currentpredicament. I am resigned to this: this partial—I might even say egotistical—interpretation, always from the angle of current need, is inevitable. Before the war,Ferdydurke passed for the ravings of a madman, because in a time of jubilantcreativity and straining for political power, my book ruined the parade. Today,when the Mug and Fanny have really irked the nation, Ferdydurke has beenelevated to the rank of satire and criticism. As if I were Voltaire! Now they say it is awise (hah! even a clear and concise) book, the work of a sober rationalist whojudges and metes out punishment with premeditation, a virtually classic and mostcarefully pondered work!To go from being crazy to being a rationalist—is this a promotion for anartist? Yet this Ferdydurkean rationalism breaks down at some point, for the criticsand the articles usually close with the troubled statement that Gombrowicz hasprobably ‘‘not thought his ideas all the way through’’ because somehow the workdoes not want to ﬁt into the ‘‘concept’’ they have so busily deduced. Or perhaps itdoesn’t ﬁt because the concept is too narrow? I will try to describe our greatestmisunderstandings.Ferdydurke is difﬁcult to interpret because it contains a very speciﬁc view ofman. How do they see this man of mine? And how do I see him?They say—and correctly—that in Ferdydurke man is created by people. Butthey understand this primarily as man’s being dependent on a social group, whichimposes custom, convention, and style upon him. . . . They even say that this is analtogether banal truth, a cliché and a forcing of open doors.288Volume 2There is one thing, however, that they have not noticed. Namely, that thisprocess of forming man through people is conceived of much more broadly inFerdydurke. I do not deny that the individual is dependent on his milieu—but forme it is far more important, artistically far more creative, psychologically far moreprofound, and philosophically far more disturbing that man is also created by anindividual man, by another person. In chance encounters. Every minute of theday. By virtue of the fact that I am always ‘‘for another,’’ counting on someone else’sseeing me, being able to exist in a speciﬁc manner only for someone else and bysomeone else, and existing—as a form—only through another. Therefore, it is not amatter of my milieu’s imposing a convention or, speaking in Marxist terms, thatman is a product of his social class, but that the depiction of man’s encounter withman in all of its fortuitousness, directness, wildness, results in showing how Form,and often the most unpredictable, absurd form, is born of these accidental encoun-ters. Since I do not need form for myself, I need it only so another person can see,feel, and experience me. Can’t you see this Form is something far more powerfulthan a simple social convention? And that it is an uncontrollable element? As longas you understand Ferdydurke as a battle with convention, it will trot calmly downthe well-beaten path; but if you understand that man creates himself with anotherman in the sense of the wildest debauchery, Ferdydurke will neigh and leap forwardas if you had jabbed it with a spur, carrying you off into the realm of the Unpredict-able. Ferdydurke is more a form-element than a form-convention.They say further that in Ferdydurke (and in my other works) I wage a battlewith distortion, with hypocrisy. . . . Undoubtedly. But isn’t this also a simpliﬁcationof my intentions and my concept of man?Why, my man is created from the outside, that is, he is inauthentic inessence—he is always not-himself, because he is determined by form, which isborn between people. His ‘‘I,’’ therefore, is marked for him in that ‘‘interhumanity.’’An eternal actor, but a natural one, because his artiﬁciality is inborn, it makes up afeature of his humanity—to be a man means to be an actor—to be a man means topretend to be a man—to be a man means to ‘‘act like’’ a man while not being onedeep inside—to be a man is to recite humanity. In these circumstances, therefore,how is one to understand the struggle with the mug, with the grimace in Fer-dydurke? Not that man should get rid of his own mug—for beyond it he has no1957289face—here one can only demand that he be conscious of his artiﬁciality andconfess it. If I am condemned to deception, the only honesty to which I haveaccess is the admission that honesty is inaccessible to me. If I can never be entirelymyself, the only thing that allows me to save my personality from annihilation ismy will to authenticity, that stubborn-in-spite-of-everything ‘‘I want to be myself,’’which is nothing more than a tragic and hopeless revolt against deformation. Icannot be myself, yet I want to be myself and I must be myself—this is the anti-nomy, one of those that do not let themselves be resolved . . . and do not expect meto provide you with medicine for incurable diseases. Ferdydurke merely conﬁrmsman’s inner division—nothing more.And degradation?Why have they almost completely ignored the degradation which plays sostrongly in my works, which alone lends my form its true ﬂavor?They have concentrated on the problem of deformation—they have forgot-ten that Ferdydurke is also a book about immaturity . . . man cannot express himselfon the outside not only because others warp him—he cannot express himselfbecause, ﬁrst of all, only that which is already ordered in us and mature lends itselfto expression, and all the rest, that is, our immaturity, is silence. Therefore formwill always be something compromising—we are degraded by form. And it is notdifﬁcult to see how, for example, our entire cultural inheritance, which existsprecisely because we have concealed our immaturity, is the work of people pullingthemselves up to a certain standard, of people who are wisdom, seriousness, pro-fundity, responsibility only on the outside (and being incapable of revealing theirimmaturity never mention the other side of the coin)—just as all of our arts,philosophies, moralities, compromise us, for they are above us and more maturethan we are; they plunge us into some sort of second childishness. We cannothandle our culture internally—this is a fact which has not been adequately consid-ered, but which nevertheless determines the tone of our ‘‘cultural life.’’ Deepinside we are eternal striplings.Man’s degradation via form also happens in other ways, however.If my form works itself out through contact with others, these people canbe superior or inferior to me. In shaping my form through beings found on a lowerrung of development, I gain a lower form, more immature than the one due me. I