sand, pebbles sparkling, one two, one two, pant legs, heels, sweat,eyelids heavy from a sleepless night on the train, nothing but arank-and-ﬁle trudging along. He stopped.“Let’s rest.”“How far is it?”“Not far.”I looked around and saw whatever there was to see, and it wasprecisely what I didn’t want to see because I had seen it so manytimes before: pines and fences,ﬁrs and cottages, weeds and grass,a ditch, footpaths and cabbage patches,ﬁelds and a chimney . . .the air . . . all glistening in the sun, yet black, the blackness of trees,the grayness of the soil, the earthy green of plants, everythingrather black. A dog barked, Fuks turned into a thicket.“It’s cooler here.”“Let’s go on.”“Wait a minute. Let’s sit down a while.”He ventured deeper into the bushes where recesses and hol-lows were opening up, darkened from above by a canopy of inter-twining hazel branches and boughs of spruce, I ventured withmy gaze into the disarray of leaves, twigs, blotches of light, thick-ets, recesses, thrusts, slants, bends, curves, devil knows what, intoa mottled space that was charging and receding, ﬁrst growing quiet, then, I don’t know, swelling, displacing everything, open-ing wide . . . lost and drenched in sweat, I felt the ground below,black and bare. There was something stuck between the trees—something was protruding that was diﬀerent and strange, thoughindistinct . . . and this is what my companion was also watching.“A sparrow.”“Ah.”
 Witold GombrowiczIt was a sparrow. A sparrow hanging on a piece of wire. Hanged.Its little head to one side, its beak wide open. It was hanging on athin wire hooked over a branch.Remarkable. A hanged bird. A hanged sparrow. The eccentric-ity of it clamored with a loud voice and pointed to a human handthat had torn into the thicket—but who?Who hanged it, why, for what reason? . . . my thoughts wereentangled in this overgrowth abounding in a million combina-tions, the jolting train ride, the night ﬁlled with the rumble of thetrain, lack of sleep, the air, the sun, the march here with this Fuks,there was Jasia and my mother, the mess with the letter, the way I had “cold-shouldered” my father, there was Roman, and alsoFuks’s problem with his boss in the oﬃce (that he’s been tellingme about), ruts, clods of dirt, heels, pant legs, pebbles, leaves, allof it suddenly fell down before the bird, like a crowd on its knees,and the bird, the eccentric, seized the reign . . . and reigned inthis nook.“Who could have hanged it?”“Some kid.”“No. It’s too high up.”“Let’s go.”But he didn’t stir. The sparrow was hanging. The ground wasbare but in some places short, sparse grass was encroaching on it,many things lay about, a piece of bent sheet metal, a stick, anotherstick, some torn cardboard, a smaller stick, there was also a beetle,an ant, another ant, some unfamiliar bug, a wood chip, and so onand on, all the way to the scrub at the roots of the bushes—hewatched as I did. “Let’s go.” But he went on standing, looking, thesparrow was hanging, I was standing, looking. “Let’s go.” “Let’s
Cosmos go.” But we didn’t budge, perhaps because we had already stoodhere too long and the right moment for departure had passed . . .and now it was all becoming heavier, more awkward . . . the twoof us with the hanging sparrow in the bushes . . . and somethinglike a violation of balance, or tactlessness, an impropriety on ourpart loomed in my mind . . . I was sleepy.“Well, let’s get going!” I said, and we left . . . leaving the sparrowin the bushes, all alone.Further march down the road in the sun scorched and weariedus, so we stopped, disgruntled, and again I asked “is it far?” Fuksanswered by pointing to a notice posted on a fence: “They’ve gotrooms for rent here too.” I looked. A little garden. In the gardenthere was a house behind a hedge, no ornaments or balconies,boring and shabby, low budget, with a skimpy porch stickingout, wooden, Zakopane-style, with two rows of windows, ﬁve each on the ﬁrst and second ﬂoors, while in the little garden—afew stunted trees, pansies withering in the ﬂower beds, a couple of gravel footpaths. But he thought we should check it out, whynot, sometimes in a dingy place like this the food could be ﬁnger- licking good, cheap too. I was ready to walk in and look, thoughwe had passed a few similar notices and hadn’t paid any attention,and besides, I was dripping with sweat. He opened the gate, andwe walked along the gravel path toward the glittering window-panes. He rang the bell, we stood a while on the porch until thedoor opened and a woman, no longer young, about forty, cameout, maybe a housekeeper, bosomy and slightly plump.“We’d like to see the rooms.”“One moment please, I’ll get the lady of the house.”We waited on the porch, the din of the train still in my head, thejourney, the previous day’s events, the swarm, the haze, the roar.
 Witold GombrowiczCascading, overwhelming roar. What intrigued me in this womanwas a strange deformity of the mouth in the face of a bright-eyed,decent little housekeeper—her mouth was as if incised on oneside, and its lengthening, just by a bit, by a fraction of an inch,made her upper lip curl upward, leap aside, or slither away, almostlike a reptile, and that sideways slipperiness slipping away repelledme by its reptilian, frog-like coldness, and, like a dark passage, itinstantly warmed and aroused me, leading me to a sin with her,sexual, slippery, and lubricious. And her voice came as a surprise—I don’t know what kind of voice I had expected from such amouth—but she sounded like an ordinary housekeeper, middle-aged and corpulent. I now heard her call from inside the house:“Auntie! A couple of gentlemen are here about the room!”After a few moments the aunt trundled out on her short littlelegs as if on a rolling pin, she was rotund—we exchanged a few re-marks, yes indeed, there is a room for two, with board, pleasecome this way! A whiﬀof ground coﬀee, a narrow hallway, a smallalcove, wooden stairs, you’re here for a while, ah, yes, studying, it’speaceful here, quiet . . . at the top there was another hallway andseveral doors, the house was cramped. She opened the door to thelast room oﬀthe hallway, I only glanced at it, because it was likeall rooms for rent, dark, shades drawn, two beds and a wardrobe,one clothes hanger, a water pitcher on a saucer, two small lampsby the beds, no bulbs, a mirror in a grimy frame, ugly. From underthe window shade a little sunlight settled in a spot on the ﬂoor, the scent of ivy ﬂoated in and with it the buzzing of a gadﬂy. And yet . . . and yet there was a surprise, because one of the beds wasoccupied and someone lay on it, a woman, lying, it seemed, notquite as she should have been, though I don’t know what gave methe sense of this being, let’s say, so out of place—whether it was
Cosmos that the bed was without sheets, with only a mattress—or that herleg lay partially on the metal mesh of the bed (because the mat-tress had moved a little), or was it the combination of the leg andthe metal that surprised me on this hot, buzzing, exhausting day.Was she asleep? When she saw us she sat up and tidied her hair.“Lena, what are you doing, honey? Really! Gentlemen—mydaughter.”In response to our bows she nodded her head, rose, and leftsilently—her silence put to rest the thought of anything out of theordinary.We were shown another room next door, exactly the same butslightly cheaper because it wasn’t connected directly to a bath-room. Fuks sat on the bed, Mrs. Wojtys, a bank manager’s wife, saton a little chair, and the ﬁnal upshot was that we rented thecheaper room, with board, of which she said: “Y ou’ll see for your-selves.”We were to have breakfast and lunch in our room and supperdownstairs with the family.“Go back for your luggage, gentlemen, Katasia and I will geteverything ready.”We returned to town for our luggage.We came back with our luggage.We unpacked while Fuks was explaining how lucky we were, theroom was inexpensive, the other one, the one that had been rec-ommended to him would surely have been more expensive . . .and also farther away . . . “The grub will be good, you’ll see!” Igrew more and more weary of his ﬁsh-face, and . . . to sleep . . .sleep . . . I went to the window, looked out, that wretched littlegarden was scorching in the sun, farther on there was the fenceand the road, and beyond that two spruce trees marked the spot
 Witold Gombrowiczin the thicket where the sparrow was hanging. I threw myself onthe bed, spun around, fell asleep, mouth slipping from mouth, lipsmore like lips because they were less like lips . . . but I was nolonger asleep. Something had awakened me. The housekeeper wasstanding over me. It was morning, yet dark, like night. Because itwasn’t morning. She was waking me: “The Mr. and Mrs. Wojtyswould like you to come down for supper.” I got up. Fuks was al-ready putting on his shoes. Supper. In the dining room, a tightcubbyhole, a sideboard with a mirror, yogurt, radishes, and theeloquence of Mr. Wojtys, the ex–bank manager, who wore a signetring and gold cuﬄinks:“Mark you, dear fellow, I have now designated myself to be atthe beck and call of my better half, and I am to render speci ﬁc ser- vices, namely, when the faucet goes on the fritz, or the radio . . .I would recommend more sweetie butter with the radishes, thebutter is tip-top . . . ”“Thank you.”“This heat, there’s bound to be a thunderstorm, I swear on theholiest of holies, bless me and my grenadiers!”“Did you hear the thunder, Daddy, beyond the forest, faraway?” (This was Lena, I hadn’t seen much of her yet, I hadn’t seenmuch of anything, in any case the ex-manager or the ex-directorwas expressing himself with a ﬂourish.) “May I suggest a teensy-weensy helping of curdled milk, my wife is a very special special-ist when it comes to curdled milkie, and what is it that makes hersthe crème de la crème,my dear fellow? It’s the pot! The quality ofmilk fermentation depends on the lactic attributes of the pot.”“What do you know, Leon!” (The ex-manager’s wife interjectedthis.) “I’m a bridge player, my dears, an ex-banker, now a bridgeplayer in the afternoons as well as Sunday nights, by special wifely
Cosmos dispensation! So, gentlemen, you are here to study? Quite so, per-fect, peace and quiet, the intellect can wallow like fruit in a com-pote . . . ” But I wasn’t really listening, Mr. Leon’s head was like adome, elf-like, its baldness riding over the table, accentuated by thesarcastic ﬂashing of his pince-nez, next to him Lena, a lake, and thepolite Mrs. Leon sitting on her rotundity and rising from it to pre-side over supper with self-sacriﬁce, the nature of which I had notyet grasped, Fuks saying something pallid, white, phlegmatic—Iate a piece of meat pie, still feeling sleepy, they talked about thedust in the air, that the season had not yet begun, I asked if it wascool at night, we ﬁnished the meat pie, then the fruit compotemade its appearance, and, after the compote, Katasia pushed anashtray toward Lena, the ashtray had a wire mesh—as if an echo,a faint echo of the other net (on the bed), on which a leg, a foot, acalf lay on the wire netting of the bed when I had walked into theroom etc., etc. Katasia’s lip, slithering, found itself near Lena’s littlemouth.I hovered over it, I, who after leaving the other, there, in War-saw, now became stuck in this, here, and I was beginning to . . . Ihovered for one brief moment, but then Katasia left, Lena movedthe ashtray to the center of the table—I lit a cigarette—someoneturned on the radio—Mr. Wojtys drummed on the table with hisﬁngertips and hummed a little tune, something like ti-ri-ri, butthen broke oﬀ—drummed again, hummed again and broke o ﬀ.I t was cramped. The room was too small. Lena’s mouth closing andparting, its shyness . . . and that’s it, goodnight, we’re on our wayupstairs.We were undressing, and Fuks, shirt in hand, resumed his com-plaints about his boss, Drozdowski, he moaned whitely and wanly,carrot-like, that Drozdowski, that at ﬁrst they got along famously,
 Witold Gombrowiczthen something or other went sour, one way or another, I began toget on his nerves, can you imagine, I get on his nerves, let me movea ﬁnger and I get on his nerves, do you understand that, to get onyour boss’s nerves, seven hours a day, he can’t stand me, he obvi-ously tries not to look at me for seven hours straight, and if hehappens to look at me his eyeballs skip away as if he’d beenscalded, for seven hours! I don’t know—Fuks went on, his eyesﬁxed on his shoes—sometimes I feel like falling on my knees andcrying out: Forgive me, Mr. Drozdowski, forgive me! But forgiveme for what? And it’s not even his fault, I really do irritate him, myfriends at work tell me shush, stay out of his sight, but—Fuksogled me sadly,ﬁsh-like, with melancholy—but how can I keep inor out of his sight when we’re together in the same room sevenhours a day, if I clear my throat, move my hand, he breaks out ina rash. Maybe I stink? And in my mind I associated the lamen-tations of the rejected Fuks with my departure from Warsaw,resentful, disdaining, both of us, he and I, dispossessed . . . the re-sentment . . . and so we went on undressing in this rented, unfa-miliar room, in a house found by a ﬂuke, by accident, like twocastaways, spurned. We talked some more about the Wojtyses, thefamily atmosphere, I fell asleep. I awoke. It was night. Dark. Buriedunder my sheets, a few minutes passed before I found myself againin the room with the wardrobe, the night table, the water pitcher,until I found my bearings in relation to the windows and thedoor—which I managed to do thanks to a persistent though silentcerebral eﬀort. I vacillated for a long time, what should I do, goback to sleep or not . . . I didn’t feel like sleeping, I didn’t feel likegetting up either, so I mulled it over: should I get up, or sleep, orlie here,ﬁnally I stuck out my leg and sat up on the bed, and whenI sat up the white blotch of the curtained window loomed before
Cosmos my eyes and, stepping up to it barefoot, I drew the curtain aside:there, beyond the little garden, beyond the fence, beyond the roadwas the spot where the sparrow was hanging, hanged among thetangled branches, the black soil below it, where the bit of card-board, the piece of sheet metal, the strips of lath, were lying about,where the tips of spruce were basking in the starlit night. I pulledthe curtain back but I didn’t move away because it occurred to methat Fuks might be watching me.In fact, I couldn’t hear him breathing . . . and if he wasn’t asleephe must have seen that I was looking out the window, which in it-self wouldn’t be anything perverse were it not for the night andthe bird, the bird in the night, the bird with the night. Because mylooking out the window must have had something to do with thebird . . . and this was embarrassing . . . but the silence had lastedfar too long and was too absolute, bringing me to the certaintythat he was not there, that he had not been there all along, that noone lay on his bed. I drew the curtain back again, and by the glowof the starry swarms I saw a vacant space where Fuks should havebeen. Where did he go?T o the bathroom? No, the hum of water from there was solitary.But in that case . . . what if he had gone to see the sparrow? I don’tknow why I thought of it, but I knew right away that this was quitepossible, he could have gone, he had been interested in the spar-row, he was in the bushes looking for an explanation, his carroty,phlegmatic mug was just the thing for such a search, it was justlike him . . . to ponder, to scheme, who hanged it, why did he hangit . . . and, maybe he chose this house, among other things, be-cause of the sparrow (this would be stretching it a bit, but thethought was there, additionally, in the background), anyway, hehad awakened, or maybe he hadn’t gone to sleep at all, and, his
 Witold Gombrowiczcuriosity piqued, he got up, maybe he went to check some detailand to look around in the night? . . . was he playing detective? . . .I was inclined to believe it. More and more I was inclined to be-lieve it. His doing this did me no harm, on balance, but I wouldhave preferred not to begin our stay at the Wojtyses’ with suchnocturnal escapades and, furthermore, I was a bit irritated thatthe sparrow was emerging again, bothering us, and it seemed toﬂuﬀits feathers, put on airs and pretend to be more importantthan it really was—and if this moron had actually gone to it, thesparrow would become a personage accepting visitors! I smiled.What next? I didn’t know what to do, yet I didn’t feel like goingback to bed, I put on my pants, opened the door to the hallway,stuck out my head. There was no one, it was cooler, in the wandarkness I was aware of a little window to the left at the top of thestairs, I listened but heard nothing . . . I went out into the hallway,but somehow I didn’t relish the idea that a short while ago he hadsilently gone out, and now I’m silently going out . . . in sum, ourtwo exits were not quite so innocent . . . And when I left the roomI re-created in my mind the ﬂoor plan of the house, the branchingof the rooms, the arrangement of walls, alcoves, passages, furni-ture, and even people . . . all unfamiliar, I was barely becoming ac-quainted with it.But here I was in the hallway of a strange house, in the dead ofnight, in just my pants and shirt—this peeked at sensuality, it waslike slithering toward Katasia with the same slipperiness as herlip . . . where was she sleeping? Sleeping? As soon as I asked myselfthat, I became someone walking toward her in the night, down thehallway, barefoot, in just my shirt and pants, the tiny, just-a-tadtwirl-up of her lip, slippery and reptilian, together with my coldand disagreeable rejection and estrangement from those I had left
Cosmos behind in Warsaw, drove me coldly toward her swinish lust which,somewhere here, in this sleeping house . . . Where was she sleep-ing? I took a few steps, reached the stairs and looked out the littlewindow, the only one in the hallway, it looked out from the otherside of the house, the one opposite the road and the sparrow, ontoa wide space surrounded by a wall and lit by swarms and multi-tudes of stars; here was a similar little garden with gravel footpathsand frail little trees, passing farther on into a vacant lot with a pileof bricks and a small shed . . . T o the left, next to the house, was anaddition, probably the kitchen, the laundry, maybe it was therethat Katasia rocked to sleep the frolic of her little mouth . . .Moonless star-ﬁlled sky—stupendous—constellations emergedout of the swarms of stars, some I knew, the Big Dipper, the GreatBear, I was identifying them, but others, unfamiliar to me, werealso lurking there, as if inscribed into the distribution of the majorstars, I tried to ﬁll in lines that might bind them into forms . . . andthis deciphering, this charting, suddenly wearied me, I switched tothe little garden, but here too the multiplicity of objects such as achimney, a pipe, the angle of a gutter, the cornice of a wall, a smalltree, as well as their more involved combinations like the turn anddisappearance of the path, the rhythm of shadows, soon weariedme . . . yet I would begin anew, though reluctantly, to look forforms, patterns, I no longer felt like it, I was bored and impatientand cranky, until I realized that what riveted me to these objects,how shall I put it, what attracted me to the “behind,” the “beyond,”was the way that one object was “behind” the other, that the pipewas behind the chimney, the wall was behind the corner of thekitchen, just like . . . like . . . like . . . at supper when Katasia’s lipswere behind Lena’s little mouth when Katasia moved the ashtraywith the wire mesh while leaning over Lena, lowering her slither-
 Witold Gombrowiczing lips close to . . . I was more surprised than I should have been,at this point I was inclined to exaggerate everything, and besides,the constellations, the Big Dipper, etc., amounted to somethingcerebral, exhausting, and I thought “what? mouths, together?” Iwas particularly astonished by the fact that both their mouthswere now, in my imagination, in my memory, more closely linkedtogether than then, at the table, I tried to clear my head by shak-ing it, but that made the connection of Lena’s lips with Katasia’slips even more clear-cut, so I smirked, because truly, Katasia’stwirled-up lasciviousness, her slipping into swinish lust had noth-ing, absolutely nothing in common with the fresh parting and in-nocent closing of Lena’s lips, it’s just that one was “in relation tothe other”—as on a map, where one city is in relation to anothercity—anyway, the idea of maps had entered my head, a map of thesky, or an ordinary map with cities, etc. The entire “connection”was not really a connection, merely one mouth considered in re-lation to another mouth, in the sense of distance, for example, ofdirection and position . . . nothing more . . . but, while I now es-timated that Katasia’s mouth was most likely somewhere in thevicinity of the kitchen (she slept thereabouts), in fact I wonderedwhere, in what direction, and at what distance was it from Lena’slittle mouth. And my coldly-lustful striving in the hallway towardKatasia underwent a dislocation because of Lena’s incidental in-trusion.And this was accompanied by increasing distraction. Not sur-prisingly, because too much attention to one object leads to dis-traction, this one object conceals everything else, and when wefocus on one point on the map we know that all other points areeluding us. And I, gazing at the little garden, at the sky, at the “be-yond” duality of the two mouths, I knew, I knew that something
Cosmos was eluding me . . . something important . . . Fuks! Where wasFuks? Was he “playing detective”? I hoped this wouldn’t end in abig mess! I was disgruntled about having rented a room with thisﬁsh-like Fuks whom I hardly knew . . . but there, ahead of me wasthe little garden, the trees, the footpaths passing into a ﬁeld with a pile of bricks and all the way on to a wall that was incredibly white,but this time it all appeared as a visible sign of something that Icould not see, namely the other side of the house, where there alsowas a bit of a garden, then the fence, the road, and beyond it thethicket . . . and within me the tension of starlight merged with thetension of the hanged bird. Was Fuks there, by the sparrow?The sparrow! The sparrow! Actually neither Fuks nor the spar-row was of much interest to me, it was the mouth, quite plainly,that really intrigued me . . . or so I thought in my distraction . . .and as I let go of the sparrow to concentrate on the mouth, a tire-some game of tennis evolved, for the sparrow sent me to themouth, the mouth back to the sparrow, and I found myself be-tween the sparrow and the mouth, one hiding behind the other,and, as soon as I caught up with the mouth, eagerly, as if I had lostit, I already knew that beyond this side of the house was the otherside, that beyond the mouth was the sparrow hanging all alone . . .But worst of all, the sparrow could not be placed on the same mapas the mouth, it was totally beyond, in another realm, it was herequite by chance, ridiculous actually, so why was it cropping up, ithad no right! . . . Oh, oh, it had no right! Had no right? The lessjustiﬁcation it had the more strongly it inﬂicted itself upon me and became more intrusive and more diﬃcult for me to shakeoﬀ—if it had no right, then the fact that it was pestering me wasall the more signiﬁcant!I stood a while longer in the hallway, between the sparrow and
 Witold Gombrowiczthe mouth. I returned to my room, lay down, and fell asleep fasterthan one would have expected.The next day we took out our books and papers and went towork—I didn’t ask him what he had done during the night—I feltreluctant to recall my own adventures in the hallway, I was likesomeone who had succumbed to fanciful extravagances and nowfeels awkward, yes, I felt awkward, but Fuks looked sheepish tooand mutely turned to his calculations, which were laborious, onnumerous scraps of paper, he even used logarithms, his goal beingto develop a method at roulette, a method that would be, withoutthe slightest doubt—and he knew it—humbug, tommyrot, buton which he focused all his energies because he had nothing bet-ter to do, nothing to keep him busy, his situation was hopeless, hisvacation would be over in two weeks, he would then return to hisoﬃce and to Drozdowski who would make superhuman e ﬀorts not to look at him, but there was no way around it because, evenif he were to carry out his duties diligently, this too would be un-bearable to Drozdowski . . . Exuding yawns, his eyes turned intotiny slits, he even stopped complaining, he was the way he was,who cares, all he could do now was to taunt me about my aggra-vation with my family, that’s it, see, everyone’s got his troubles,they’re bugging you too, shit, I tell you, it’s horrible, it’s all a sham!In the afternoon we went by bus to Krupówki, did some shop-ping. Suppertime came, I had been waiting for it impatiently be-cause I wanted to see Lena and Katasia, Katasia with Lena, afterlast night. In the meantime, I restrained myself from thinkingabout them,ﬁrst, let me see them again, then think.But what an unexpected upset of the apple cart!She was a married woman! Her husband showed up after wehad started eating, and now he was bringing his longish nose to
Cosmos his plate, while I watched this erotic mate of hers with a distaste-ful curiosity. What confusion—not that I was jealous, it’s just thatnow she seemed diﬀerent, totally changed by this man who was soalien to me, yet privy to the most secret closings of her littlemouth—it was obvious that they were only married recently, hecovered her hand with his hand and looked into her eyes. Whatwas he like? Quite a big man, well built, on the heavy side, intelli-gent enough, an architect working on the construction of a hotel.He spoke little, reached for a radish now and then—but what washe like? What was he like? And how were they with each otherwhen alone, how was he with her, she with him, the two of themtogether? . . . ugh, to bump into a man at the side of a womanwho turns us on, that’s no fun . . . worse still, such a man, a totalstranger, suddenly becomes the object of our—compulsory—curiosity, and we have to keep guessing his personal likes and dis-likes . . . even though it disgusts us . . . we have to experience himthrough the woman. I don’t know which I would prefer: alluringas she is, that she should now turn out to be repulsive because ofhim, or that she also become enticing because of the man she haschosen—awful possibilities either way!Were they in love? Passionate love? Sensible? Romantic? Easy?Diﬃcult? Not in love at all? Here, at the table, in the presence ofher family, it was just the casual tenderness of a young couple thatone could not, after all, watch at will, but only by stealing glances,by applying a whole system of maneuvers “on the border,” thatwould not transgress the demarcation line . . . I couldn’t very wellstare him in the face, my inquiry, ardent yet somewhat disgusting,had to be limited to his hand as it lay on the table in front of me,near her palm, I looked at this hand, big, clean, ﬁngers not un- pleasant, nails clipped . . . I continued watching it, and I became
 Witold Gombrowiczmore and more infuriated that I had to penetrate the erotic possi-bilities of this hand (as if I were her, Lena). I found out nothing.Actually, the hand looked decent enough, but what of it, every-thing depends on the touch (I thought), on how he touches her,and I could perfectly well imagine their touching each other to bedecent, or indecent, or dissolute, wild, mad, or simply conjugal—and nothing, nothing is known, nothing, because why couldn’tshapely hands touch each other grotesquely, even astraddle, whatassurance was there? Yet it was hard to imagine that a hand, sohealthy and decent, would indulge in such excesses. Really, butsuppose that it “nevertheless” did, then this “nevertheless” wouldbecome yet one more depravity. And if I could not have any cer-tainty about their hands, what about their persons, in the back-ground, where I hardly dared to look? And I knew that a single,clandestine, barely visible hooking of his ﬁnger round her ﬁnger would be enough for their persons to become in ﬁnitely licentious, even though he, Ludwik, was just at that moment saying that hehad brought the photos, and that they had come out very well,he’ll show them after supper . . .“What a comical phenomenon,” Fuks was ﬁnishing his account ofﬁnding the sparrow in the bushes on our way here. “A hangedsparrow! Who would ever think of hanging a sparrow? It’s like ﬂavoring borscht with two mushrooms instead of just one—it’stoo much!”“Two mushrooms, two mushrooms indeed!” Mr. Leon politelyassented, happy to agree. “Two mushrooms, now you ﬁguree that, if you please,ﬁddle-de-dee, but what sadism!”“Hooligans,” opined Mrs. Roly-Poly curtly and picked a threadoﬀhis cuﬀ, while he instantly and happily agreed: “Hooligans.” T owhich Roly-Poly replied:
Cosmos “Y ou always have to contradict!”“But Marysweetie, I say yes, hooligans!”“But I say, hooligans!” she exclaimed, as if he had said some-thing diﬀerent.“That’s right, hooligans, I say, hooligans . . . ”“Y ou don’t know what you’re saying!”She straightened the border of the handkerchief sticking out ofhis breast pocket.Katasia emerged from the pantry to clear the plates, and hertwirled-up, slippery, darting lip appeared near the mouth that wasacross the table from me—I had been anxiously awaiting this mo-ment while at the same time restraining myself, turning awayfrom it so as not to inﬂuence anything, or interfere . . . so that theexperiment would come oﬀobjectively. Mouth immediately beganto “relate to” mouth . . . and I saw that just then her husband wassaying something to her, and Leon was butting in, and Katasia wasbusy walking around, and all the while mouth was relating tomouth, like a star to a star, and this mouth constellation corrobo-rated my nocturnal escapades which I’d rather be done with . . .yet mouth with mouth, that slithering away disgusting twirled-up lip slipping away with that soft and pure mouth closing-and-parting . . . as if they really had something in common! I lapsedinto something like a trembling incredulity over two mouths hav-ing nothing in common yet having something in common, thisfact overwhelmed me and actually plunged me even deeper intounbelievable distraction—and it was all suﬀused with the night, as if steeped in yesterday, murky.Ludwik wiped his mouth with a napkin, and, setting it aside in an orderly fashion (he seemed to be very neat and clean, buthis cleanliness could actually be ﬁlthy . . . ), and he said, in his
 Witold Gombrowiczbass-baritone voice, that about a week ago he too had noticed ahanged chicken on a spruce by the roadside—but he had notgiven it much thought, anyway after a couple of days the chickenwas gone.“Oh, wonder of wonders,” Fuks marveled, “hanged sparrows,hanging chickens, maybe it’s an omen that the world is coming to an end? How high up was the chicken hanging? How far fromthe road?”He was asking these questions because Drozdowski couldn’tstand him, because he hated Drozdowski, because he didn’t knowwhat else to do . . . He ate a radish.“Hooligans,” repeated Mrs. Roly-Poly. She adjusted the bread inthe basket with the gesture of a good hostess and provider ofmeals. She then blew oﬀsome bread crumbs. “Hooligans! Thereare lots of kids around, they do whatever they please!”“That’s right!” Leon agreed.“The crux of the matter is,” Fuks wanly remarked, “both thesparrow and the chicken were hanged at the reach of an adult’shand.”“Well? If not hooligans then who? So you think, siree, that it’ssome weirdo? I haven’t heard of any weirdos in this vicinity.”He hummed ti-ri-ri and with great attention turned to makingbread pellets—he lined them up in a row on the tablecloth,watched them.Katasia pushed the wire-mesh ashtray toward Lena. Lena ﬂicked the ash from her cigarette, while within me her leg responded onthe wire netting of the bed, what distraction, mouth above mouth,bird and wire, chicken and sparrow, she and her husband, chim-ney behind drainpipe, lips behind lips, mouth and mouth, littletrees and footpaths, trees and the road, too much, too much, with-
Cosmos out rhyme or reason, wave after wave, immensity in distraction,dissipation. Distraction. Tiresome confusion, there in the cornerwas a bottle standing on a shelf and one could see a piece of some-thing, maybe of a cork, stuck to the neck . . .. . . I glued myself to the cork, and thus I rested with it until wewent to bed, then, dreaming, sleeping, for the next few days noth-ing, nothing at all, a mire of activities, words, eating, going up andgoing down the stairs, though I did ﬁnd out this and that,primo, that Lena taught foreign languages, she had married Ludwikmerely two months ago, they went to Hel Peninsula, now they’lllive here until he ﬁnishes their little house—all this Katasia toldme, kindly, happy to oblige, dustcloth in hand, from one piece offurniture to another,secundo(this from Roly-Poly) “it needs to becut again, then sewn up, the surgeon told me, an old friend ofLena’s, I’ve told Katasia so many times that I’ll cover the costs be-cause, you know, she’s my niece even though she’s a simple peas-ant from the country, near Grojec, but I’m not one to disown poorrelatives, and besides, it’s not aesthetic-looking, it o ﬀends one’s sense of the aesthetic, really, it’s just gross, how many times have Itold her over the years, because it’s already been ﬁve years you know, since the accident, the bus ran into a tree, lucky nothingworse happened, how many times have I told her Kata, don’t belazy, don’t be afraid, go to the surgeon, have it done, look at your-self,ﬁx your face, but no, well, she’s lazy, scared, days pass, once ina while she’ll say I’ll go, auntie, I’ll go right away, but she doesn’t,and now we’re used to it, until someone reminds us, then it staresus in the face again, and even though I’m sensitive to the aesthetic,imagine the drudgery, cleaning, laundry, do this and that forLeon, then Lena wants something, then do something for Ludwik,from morning ’til night, one thing after another, while the opera-
 Witold Gombrowicztion waits, there’s no time for it, when Ludwik and Lena move totheir little house, maybe then, but in the meantime, it’s a goodthing that at least Lena has found an honest man, well, let him goand make her unhappy, I swear I’d kill him, I’d grab a knife andkill him, but thank God so far it’s not bad, it’s just that they won’tdo anything for themselves, neither he, nor she, just like Leon,she’s taken after her father, I have to take care of everything, re-member everything, hot water this, coﬀee that, do the laundry,socks, mend, iron, buttons, handkerchiefs, sandwiches, paper, pol-ish this, glue that, they won’t do a thing, steaks, salads, from morn-ing ’til late into the night, and, on top of it, lodgers, you knowyourself how it is, I’m not saying anything, it’s true they pay, theyrent rooms, but I still have to remember things for this one and forthat one, have it all on time, one thing after another . . . ”. . . a multitude of other events ﬁlling, absorbing me, and everyevening, as unavoidable as the moon, supper, sitting across thetable from Lena, Katasia’s mouth circling around. Leon manufac-turing his bread pellets and lining them up in a row, with greatcare—watching them intently—then after a moment’s deliber-ation impaling a pellet on a toothpick. Sometimes, after re ﬂect- ing for a while, he would pick up a little salt on the tip of his knife and sprinkle it on the pellet, watching it dubiously through his pince-nez.“Ti-ri-ri!“Gra√yna* mine!” he said, turning to Lena, “why don’t you tossyour Daddydaddy some radishy foodie food? T oss it!”Which meant that he was asking her to pass him the radishes. It
Cosmos *The name of a beautiful princess and also title of a poem about her byAdam Mickiewicz.was diﬃcult to understand such gibberish. “Oh Gra√yna mine,your Daddy’s princess beautiful!” “Roly-Poly my petite, what areyou dawdling over, can’t you see I want sucko!” He didn’t alwaysspeak in “word-monsters,” sometimes he began crazily and endedquite normally, or vice versa—the shining roundness of his balddome, his face stuck below it, his pince-nez stuck to that, hoveredabove the table like a balloon—his mood often turned humorous,and he would crack jokes, mommydear, easy does it, you know theone about the bicycle and the tricycle, when Icyk* sat on a bicyk,what a tricyk, yahoo! . . . While Roly-Poly would smooth out some-thing around his ear or on his collar. He would sink into a reverieand braid the fringe of a napkin, or push a toothpick into the table-cloth—not just anywhere but in certain spots only, to which, afterlengthy reﬂection and with knitted brow, he would return.“Ti-ri-ri.”This irritated me because of Fuks, I knew it was grist for hisDrozdowski mill, the mill that kept grinding him from morninguntil night, because he could not escape returning to his o ﬃce in three weeks, and then Drozdowski would stare at the heating stovewith a martyr-like expression, because, Fuks said, he even gets arash from my jacket, he’s grown sick of me, it can’t be helped, he’sgrown sick of me . . . and Leon’s eccentricities somehow suitedFuks because he watched them with his yellow, pallid, carrotylook . . . and this pushed me even further into resenting my par-ents, into rejecting all that was there, in Warsaw, and I sat with re-sentment and hostility, halfheartedly watching Ludwik’s hand thatI couldn’t care less about, that repulsed me, that riveted me, com-pelling me to penetrate its erotic-tactile possibilities . . . then there
 Witold Gombrowicz*A variation on the name Isaac.was Roly-Poly again, I knew, overﬂowing with activities, laundry,sweeping, mending, tidying up, ironing, etc., etc., and so on andon. Distraction. Swish and swirl. I would ﬁnd my piece of cork onthe bottle, watch the neck and the cork for the sake, I suppose, ofnot watching everything, the cork became in a way my bark on theocean, even though only a distant hum reached me from theocean, a hum too universal and too general to be really audible.And that was all. Several days ﬁlled with a little of everything.The sweltering heat continued. What an exhausting summer!And so it dragged on with the husband, the hands, the mouths,with Fuks, with Leon, it dragged on in the sweltering heat, likesomeone walking down the road . . . On the fourth or ﬁfth day my eyes strayed, not for the ﬁrst time actually, far into the room, I wassipping tea, smoking a cigarette, and, having abandoned the cork,I fastened my eye on a nail in the wall, next to the shelf, and fromthe nail I moved on to the cupboard, I counted the slats, tired andsleepy I forayed into the less accessible places above the cupboardwhere the wallpaper was frayed, and I went trudging on to theceiling, a white desert; but the tedious whiteness changed slightlyfarther on, near the window, into a rough, darker expanse con-taminated with dampness and covered with a complex geographyof continents, bays, islands, peninsulas, strange concentric circlesreminiscent of the craters of the moon, and other lines, slanting,slipping away—sick in places like impetigo, elsewhere wild andunbridled, or capricious with curlicues and turns, it breathed withthe terror ofﬁnality, lost itself in a giddy distance. And dots, Idon’t know what from, not likely from ﬂies, their origins totallyinscrutable . . . Gazing, drowned in it and in my own complexi-ties, I gazed and gazed without any particular e ﬀort yet stub- bornly, until in the end it was as if I were crossing some kind of a
Cosmos threshold—and little by little I was almost “on the other side”—Itook a gulp of tea—Fuks asked:“What are you gawking at?”I didn’t feel like talking, it was stuﬀy, the tea. I replied:“That line there, in the corner, behind the island, and that sortof a triangle . . . Next to the straits.”“What?”“Nothing.”“What about it?”“ W e l l...”After a long while I asked:“What does it remind you of?”“That smudge and the line?” he took it up eagerly, and I knewwhy so eagerly, I knew this would distract him from Drozdowski.“That? I’ll tell you, just a minute. A rake.”“Maybe a rake.”Lena joined in the conversation because we were playing atguessing, a parlor game, easy and in keeping with her shyness.“What do you mean a rake?! It’s a little arrow.”Fuks protested: “Nonsense, it’s not an arrow!”A couple of minutes ﬁlled with something else, Ludwik askedLeon, “Would you like to play chess, father?” I had a brokenﬁngernail that was bothering me, a newspaper fell to the ﬂoor, dogs barked outside the window (two little dogs, young, amusing,oﬀtheir leashes at night, there was also a cat), Leon said, “Onegame,” Fuks said:“Maybe it is an arrow.”“Maybe an arrow, maybe not an arrow,” I remarked, I picked upthe newspaper, Ludwik rose, a bus rolled down the road, Roly-Poly asked “did you make that phone call?”
 Witold Gombrowiczchapter 
Idon’t know how to tell this . . . this story . . . because I’m telling it ex post.The arrow, for instance . . . The arrow,for instance . . . The arrow, at that time, at supper, was no more important than Leon’s chess, or the newspaper, ortea, everything—equally important, everything—was contribut-ing to a given moment, a kind of consonance, the buzzing of aswarm. But today,ex post,I know it was the arrow that was themost important, so in telling this I move it to the forefront, froma myriad of undiﬀerentiated facts I extract the conﬁguration of the future. But how can one describe something except ex post? Can nothing be ever truly expressed, rendered in its anonymousbecoming, can no one ever render the babbling of the nascentmoment, how is it that, born out of chaos, we can never encounterit again, no sooner do we look than order . . . and form . . . areborn under our very eyes? No matter. Never mind. Katasia awokeme with breakfast every morning and, with my eyes just openedfrom sleep, I would catch above me the impropriety of her mouth,that slippery slipaway lip superimposed on her peasant-woman’s
cheeks, looking on, blue-eyed and kindly. Couldn’t she havemoved away from my bed a quarter of a second sooner? Wasn’tshe stooping over me a fraction of a second too long? Maybeyes . . . maybe no . . . the uncertainty . . . this possibility burrowedinto me as I lay thinking of my nocturnal machinations with her.On the other hand . . . what if she stood over me out of sheerkindness? It was hard to tell, there are substantial obstacles towatching people, it’s diﬀerent with inanimate objects, it’s only ob-jects that we can truly watch. In any case, my lying beneath hermouth pinned me down each morning and remained with methroughout the day, maintaining the conﬁguration of her mouthin which I had so stubbornly entangled myself. It was too hot forus to work, we were tired, he was bored, he stewed in his ownjuices, became a wretch, he was like a howling dog though hedidn’t howl, he was just bored. The ceiling. One afternoon we laysupine on our beds, the windows were shaded, the afternoonbuzzed with ﬂies—and I heard his voice.“Maybe Majziewicz would give me a job, but I can’t leave whereI am, it counts as training, I’d lose a year and a half, no doubtabout it, I just can’t . . . Look there, on the ceiling . . . ”“What?”“On the ceiling. There, by the stove.”“What?”“What do you see?”“Nothing.”“If only I could spit in his mug. But I can’t. And why should I?He means well, but I really get on his nerves, his jaw goes out ofjoint when he sees me . . . Have a better look at that mark on theceiling. Don’t you see anything?”“What?”
 Witold Gombrowicz“It’s like that arrow, the one we spotted on the ceiling in the din-ing room. It’s even more distinct.”I didn’t answer, one minute, two, then he spoke again:“The remarkable thing is that it wasn’t there yesterday.” Silence,the heat, my head lies heavy on the pillow, a feeling of faintness,but he spoke again as if clinging to his own words that were ﬂoat- ing in the juices of the afternoon: “It wasn’t there yesterday, a spi-der lowered itself from that spot yesterday and I watched it, Iwould have noticed the arrow—it wasn’t there yesterday. See themain line in the middle, the shaft itself, that wasn’t there, the rest,the point, the branching at the base, those, I grant you, are the oldpockmarks, but the shaft, the shaft itself . . . that wasn’t there . . . ”He drew a breath, lifted himself slightly, leaned on his elbow, dustwhirled around in a cluster of light rays coming through a hole inthe window shade. “The shaft wasn’t there.” I heard him scrambleout of bed, and I saw him in his underpants, craning his neck, ex-amining the ceiling—it surprised me—such diligence! Thatogling expression! He stuck his ogle face at the ceiling and de-clared: “Fifty, ﬁfty.* Yes or no. Devil only knows.” And he re-turned to his bed, but I knew he continued looking from there,which I found so tiresome.After a while I heard him get up again and walk over to look atthe ceiling, I wished he’d let it go . . . but he would not let it go.“The scratch that goes through the center, the shaft itself, mindyou . . . I have a hunch, it seems freshly made with a nail. It’s moreconspicuous. It wasn’t there yesterday . . . I would have noticed . . .And it points in the same direction as the other, the one in the din-ing room.”
Cosmos *In English in text.I lay there.“If it’s an arrow, it must be pointing to something.”I replied: “And if it’s not an arrow it’s not pointing.”Last night, at supper, while examining Ludwik’s hand with thatdisgusting curiosity of mine—again!—I shifted my gaze to Lena’shand that also lay on the table, and then the little hand seemed totremble or coil ever so slightly, I was not at all sure, yet ﬁfty, ﬁfty. . . But as to Fuks, I didn’t like it, maybe it even infuriated methat whatever he did or said derived from Drozdowski, from dis-respect, dislike, disgust . . . all the “dises” . . . well, if only I didn’thave my own problems with my parents in Warsaw, but the twotogether, one fed on the other. He was talking again.He stood in his underpants, in the center of the room, talking.He suggested that we should see if the arrow pointed to anything—“what’s the harm in checking, if we’re satisﬁed it doesn’t point toanything, it will give us blessed peace, then it will be clear this isnot an arrow that anyone has drawn on purpose but merely an il-lusion—there’s no other way to establish whether it’s an arrow ornot an arrow.” I listened silently, I wondered how to refuse him, heinsisted rather weakly, but I felt weak too, weakness pervadedeverything. I suggested he check it himself if he was so keen onit—he began to insist that I would be indispensable to him in es-tablishing the exact direction because someone has to go out, markthe direction in the hallway, in the garden— ﬁnally he said, “Two heads are better than one.”And all at once I agreed, I even rose im-mediately from my bed because the thought of a thrusting, res-olute motion along a ﬁxed line suddenly seemed more delectablethan a glass of cold water!We pulled our pants on.The room now ﬁlled with decisive and clear-cut activities 
 Witold Gombrowiczthat, originating as they did from boredom, from idleness, fromwhimsy, concealed some kind of idiocy within them.The task was not easy.The arrow didn’t point to anything in our room, we could tellat a glance, so it was necessary to extend its course through thewall, to see if it connected with anything in the hallway, and thencontinue the line as accurately as possible into the garden—thiscalled for rather complicated maneuvers that he really wouldn’thave managed without my participation. I went down to the gar-den and pulled out a rake from a small shed so that I could usethe handle to show the line on the lawn which would correspondto the one that Fuks was signaling to me with a broomstick fromthe staircase window. It was close to ﬁve in the afternoon—theburning-hot gravel, the drying grasses around the young treesthat gave no shade—that was down below—while above, whitewhorls of large, roundish clouds drifted in the mercilessly bluesky. The house gazed with two rows of windows, on the ﬁrst and second ﬂoor—the windowpanes glittered . . .Did one of the windowpanes look at me with a human eye?People were still having their afternoon naps—judging by thesilence—but it was quite possible that someone watched us frombehind a windowpane—Leon? Roly-Poly? Katasia?—and it wasconceivable that the one watching us was the same person whosneaked into our room, most likely during the morning hours,and gouged the line that created the arrow—what for? T o pokefun at us? For a lark? T o tell us something? No, it didn’t makesense! Well alright, indeed, yet irrationality is a stick that has twoends, and Fuks and I at the other end of this irrationality movedand acted quite rationally—and I, engaged in such laborious ma-neuvers, had to bear in mind (if I didn’t want to betray my ac-
Cosmos tions) the possibility of a gaze lurking behind the painfully glis-tening and blinding windowpanes.So I did bear it in mind. And Fuks’s gaze, looking from above,was helpful to me. I moved about cautiously so as not to arousesuspicion, I raked the grass here and there, dropped the rake as ifworn out by the heat, then imperceptibly moved it with my footin the desired direction. These precautions increased the intensityof my collaboration with Fuks more than I had intended, I movedabout almost like his slave. We ﬁnally determined the direction ofthe arrow—the line led all the way past the tool shed by the wallwhere the lot, partially littered with rubble and bricks, ended as anextension of the little garden. We moved slowly in that direction,diverging here and there as if busy studying ﬂowers and herbs, talking, gesticulating from time to time, and carefully looking for something signiﬁcant. From furrow to furrow, from twig topebble, our gaze lowered, we were absorbed by the ground thatunfolded before us—gray, yellowish, rusty-dark, boring, com-plex, sleepy, monotonous, barren, and hard. I wiped the sweat o ﬀ my face. It was all a waste of time!We came close to the wall . . . but here we stopped, helpless . . .it seemed quite diﬃcult to conquer the remaining ten steps, wewere too exposed! So far, our march through the little gardenunder the gaze of the windowpanes has been relatively easy—about ﬁfty yards across level ground—and yet it became di ﬃcult because of a concealed diﬃculty that turned it almost into aclimb—and now this same diﬃculty, brought about by the pro-gressively steeper and more dizzying climb, increased sharply, asif we were reaching a summit. What an altitude! He squatted,pretending to look at a bug, and so, hunkering down and movingas though following the bug, he reached the wall; I veered to the
 Witold Gombrowiczside, meandering here and there in order to join him in a round-about way. We were by the wall, at the far end, in the corner madeby the shed.The heat. Grasses, some rather luxuriant and swaying in thebreeze, a beetle marches on the ground, bird droppings by thewall—the heat, yet now somehow diﬀerent, and a diﬀerent odor, of urine perhaps, I daydreamed of remoteness, it was all remoteas if we had wandered for months, a place thousands of milesaway, at the ends of the earth—suddenly a whi ﬀof warm decay, there was a pile of garbage nearby, rains had created a seepage bythe wall—stalks, stems, rubble—clods of dirt, pebbles—yellowishstuﬀ. . . The heat again, yet diﬀerent, unfamiliar . . . yes, yes . . .our reaching this corner that lived apart, referred us to that other,the darkly-cool thicket with its little pieces of cardboard and sheetmetal—with the sparrow—as if by the power of distance, the oneechoed back to the other—and our searching here seemed tocome to life.An onerous task . . . because, even if something were hidinghere, to which the arrow, on the ceiling, in our room, was point-ing, how would we ﬁnd it in this entanglement, among weeds,among bits and pieces, in the litter, surpassing in number every-thing that could be happening on walls, on ceilings? An over-whelming abundance of connections, associations . . . How manysentences can one create out of the twenty-four letters of the al-phabet? How many meanings can one glean from hundreds ofweeds, clods of dirt, and other triﬂes? Heaps and multitudes gushedalso from the boards of the shed, from the wall. I got bored. Istraightened up and looked at the house and the garden—thesehuge, synthesized shapes, these enormous mastodons of the worldof reality, were restoring order—I rested. Let’s go back. I was
Cosmos about to say this to Fuks but his face, stuck to one spot, stoppedme short.Slightly above our heads the cracked wall formed a recess con-sisting of what looked like three caves diminishing in size—insideone of the caves something was hanging. A stick. A small stick,about an inch long. It hung on a white thread, not much longer. Itwas hitched over a jagged brick.Nothing more. We searched through everything in the areaonce again. Nothing. I turned around and looked at the house,glistening with its windowpanes. A whiﬀof freshness announcedthe evening, a breath that released leaves and grasses from theirtorpor in the heat. The leaves trembled on the young trees stand-ing in a row, whitewashed and propped up with stakes.We returned to our room.Fuks collapsed on his bed.“Say what you will, but the arrow has led us to something,” hesaid warily, and I, no less warily, muttered: “Like what?”Yet it was hard to pretend that one didn’t know: a hangedsparrow—a hanged stick—the hanging of the stick from the wallrepeating the hanging in the thicket—a grotesque result that sud-denly increased the sparrow’s intensity (revealing the extent towhich the sparrow had lodged within us, regardless of any pre-tense of our forgetting it). The stick and the sparrow, the sparrowreinforced by the stick! It was hard not to think that someonehad led us to the stick to make us see the connection with thesparrow . . . but why? What for? As a joke? A prank? Someone had played a trick on us, made fools of us, to amuse himself . . .I felt uneasy, Fuks felt it too, and this prompted caution.“I wouldn’t bet three cents that somebody isn’t pulling our leg.”“Who?”
 Witold Gombrowicz“One of them . . . someone who was there when I talked aboutthe sparrow and how we identiﬁed the arrow on the ceiling in thedining room. The same person gouged the arrow in our room thatleads to what? T o the stick on the thread. A practical joke. A hoax.”Yet it didn’t make sense. Who would want to play such elabo-rate jokes? What for? Who could have known that we’d discoverthe arrow and take such a deep interest in it? No—this concur-rence, however small, between the stick on the thread and the spar-row on the wire—was pure chance. Granted, a stick on a thread,one doesn’t see this every day . . . yet the stick could have beenhanging there for a thousand reasons unrelated to the sparrow, wehad exaggerated its importance because it turned up at the endpoint of our search, as its outcome—when in fact it wasn’t anyoutcome at all, it was just a stick hanging on a thread . . . Purechance then? Indeed . . . and yet one could sense in this series ofevents a propensity for congruity, something hazily linking themtogether—the hanged sparrow—the hanged chicken—the arrowin the dining room—the arrow in our room—the stick hangingon a thread—something was trying to break through and presstoward meaning, as in charades, when letters begin to make theirway toward forming a word. What word? Indeed, it seemed thateverything wanted to act in the name of an idea . . . What idea?What idea? Whose idea? If there was an idea, someone musthave been behind it—but who? Who would have wanted to bother?But what if . . . what if Fuks had played a trick on me, I don’tknow, out of boredom maybe . . . but no, why on earth Fuks . . .so much eﬀort into a stupid caper . . . no, this didn’t make senseeither. Pure chance then? I might have ﬁnally conceded that it waspure chance were it not for another abnormality that somehowhad the tendency to hook onto this abnormality . . . were it not for
Cosmos the strangeness of the stick backed by another strangeness that Ipreferred not to tell Fuks.“Katasia.”Obviously he too had thought of at least one of the faces of theSphinx—he sat on his bed, head bowed, slowly swinging his dan-gling legs.“What?” I asked.“When someone has such an aﬀected little beak . . . ” he musedand added cunningly: “Go to your own for whatever turns youon!”* He liked that and repeated with conviction: “I tell you, be-lieve me, go to your own for whatever turns you on.”Indeed . . . the lip and the stick appeared to be roughly related,if only because the lip was so eerie . . . but what then? Accept thatKatasia was amusing herself with such subtle intrigues? Nonsense.And yet there was a kinship . . . the kinship, the associationsopened before me like a dark cavern, dark yet pulling me in, suck-ing me in, because behind Katasia’s lip loomed Lena’s lips parting-and-closing, and I even felt a hot shock because the stick, in relat-ing, after all, to the sparrow in the bushes, was as if the ﬁrst sign (but oh, how pale and indistinct) in the objective world that con-ﬁrmed, as it were, my hallucinations about Lena’s mouth “relatingto” Katasia’s mouth—a faint, fantastic analogy but, after all, thissame “relating to” came into play here, somehow establishing apattern. Did Fuks know anything about this mouth connection orthe association between Lena and Katasia—had he imagined sucha thing—or was it solely and entirely my own? . . . Not for theworld would I ask him . . . And not just because it was embarrass-
 Witold Gombrowicz*Adapted from a Polish expression, to which, in later chapters, Gom-browicz gives onanistic implications.ing. Not for the world would I entrust this whole a ﬀair to his say or to his ogling eyes that had unnerved Drozdowski, his havingproblems with Drozdowski, just as I had mine with my parents,weakened me, stiﬂed and tortured me—I didn’t want him as aconﬁdant or a buddy! No to that—“no” was generally the keyword in our relationship. No and no. And yet, I became excitedwhen he said “Katasia”—I was almost happy that someone else,not just I, had spotted the possibility that her lip had some con-nection with the stick and the bird.“Katasia,” he said slowly, reﬂecting, “Katasia . . . ” But I couldalready see, after a brief euphoria, the whitish pallor of his gazereturn, Drozdowski appeared on the horizon and, just for the sakeof killing time, Fuks went on spinning his inept reasoning: “Theminute I saw her . . . the problem with her mouth seemed . . .but . . . it could be either way . . . this way or that . . . What do youthink?”
Cosmos chapter 
The evanescence, the intangibility of it all forced us toretreat, we returned to our work, I to my manuscript,he to his notes, but my distraction did not leave me, itmounted as the evening wore on, and the deepeningdarkness of those places, beyond the road, at the far end of thegarden, penetrated the brightness of our lamp. Now another pos-sibility occurred to us. Who could guarantee that, in addition tothe arrow we had discovered, there weren’t other signs hidden onthe walls or elsewhere, in the combination of the stain above thesink and the peg that lay on top of the cupboard, for example, orin the scratches on the ﬂoor . . . For every sign deciphered by ac-cident how many might go unnoticed, buried in the natural orderof things? From time to time my gaze tore away from my papersand penetrated into the depths of the room (unbeknownst toFuks, whose eyes also probably darted there). But I didn’t worryabout it very much, the fantastic volatility of the a ﬀair of the stick, constantly dispersing, would not tolerate anything that was not,just like it, ephemeral.
In any case, it was as if the surrounding reality was already con-taminated by the possibility of meanings, and this pulled me away,constantly pulled me away, from everything else, yet it seemedcomical that something like a stick could aﬀect me to such a de- gree. Supper, as unavoidable as the moon—and again I had Lenaacross from me. Before going down for supper Fuks remarked,“It’s not worth telling them about this,” and he was right, discre-tion was advisable if we didn’t want to be taken for a couple ofblockheads, lunatics. Supper then. Leon, eating his radishes, toldus how years ago director Krysiπski, his boss at the bank, taughthim the art which the boss called “the knack” or “the reverse”that—according to him—any self-respecting aspirant to a high-ranking position in the civil service should have at his ﬁngertips. He imitated the deceased director Krysiπski’s guttural, subduedvoice: “Leon, take what I’m telling you to heart, remember, it’s alla matter of the knack, don’t you see? Take the situation where youmust reprimand an oﬃce clerk, what should you do at the sametime? Well, of course, my good man, pull out your cigarette caseand treat him to a cigarette. That’s the reverse, mind you, theknack. If you need to be harsh or unpleasant to your client, smile,if not at him, then at least at his secretary. If you don’t have theknack he’ll close up on you too much and grow sti ﬀ. On the other hand, when you’re all sweetness with your client, slip in a crudeword from time to time to jerk his leash and keep him from pos-sibly stiﬀening up, because if he hardens and grows sti ﬀon you, what then?” “Well, my dear fellows,” Leon recounted, a napkintucked under his chin, his ﬁnger in the air, “one day the presidentof the bank breezes in for an inspection, I was already a divisionmanager, I entertain him with respect and all due honors, but dur-
 Witold Gombrowiczing dinner I stumble and spill half a carafe of red wine on him. Sohe says: ‘I see you’re from director Krysiπski’s school!’”Leon had a good laugh while he was cutting his radish, butter-ing it, salting it . . . he contemplated it for a moment before put-ting it in his mouth. “Hey! Oh! Oh, that bank, I could go on aboutit for a whole year, it’s hard to express, to disentangle it, as I let mythoughts run on I don’t know what to latch on to, there’s so much,so much, so many days, hours. O God, O my God, O holy God, somany months, years, seconds, the director’s secretary and I quar-reled and fought like cat and dog, she was stupid, so help me mer-ciful God, and a tattletale, once she ran to the director to tell himI had spat in the wastepaper basket, so I said to her, have you gonedaft? . . . but what’s the use, lots could be said, the why and where-fore of that spit, how, and what, as well as the way the con ﬂict grew over months, years . . . who would remember it? What’s the senseof babble-chattum replicatum, mmme! . . . ” He sank deep inthought, then added in a whisper: “And what blouse was she wear-ing at the time? Can’t remember for the life of me . . . whichone . . . The embroidered one? . . . ” He interrupted his reverieand exclaimed vigorously to Roly-Poly: “Sweetie-pie, whatever itwas, whatever happened, peek-a-boo Roly-coo!” “Y our collar iscrooked,” Roly-Poly said, she set a jar aside and proceeded to ﬁx his collar.“Thirty-seven years of conjugal life, if you please gentle-men,” he continued, “take it or leave it, either way, sweetie pie, meand you, Roly-coo, on the River Vistula, on the blue Vistulie, oncein the rain, oh boy, oh boy, well now, how many years has it been,hard candy candycoo, I bought some hard candy, then that jani-tor, the janitor, and the roof leaked, hey, hey, hey-ho, mommy-dearie, how many years has it been, in a little café, and what a café,
Cosmos where, gone into thin air, gone-zo, bye-bye . . . I can’t put it to-gether again . . . Thirty-seven years! What of it . . . Hey, ho!” hebrightened, then lapsed into silence, retreated into himself,stretched out his hand, reached for the bread and slowly rolled alittle pellet, watched it, fell silent, hummed ti-ri-ri.He sliced a piece of bread, cut oﬀthe edge to make it square,buttered it, spread the butter evenly, patted it with his knife, saltedit, and pushed it into his mouth—he ate it. And he seemed tomake sure he ate it. I looked at the arrow that had spread, spilledonto the ceiling, what kind of an arrow was that, how could wehave perceived it as an arrow?! I also looked at the table, at thetablecloth, one must admit there is a limit to what can be seen—so then, on the tablecloth, Lena’s hand resting, relaxed, small,coﬀee-colored, warmly-cool, growing by way of the wrist from themore distant whiteness of her shoulder (which I merely guessed atbecause I didn’t venture that far with my gaze), and so, the handwas quiet and idle, but looking more closely one noticed a trem-bling, it was, for example, the trembling of the skin at the base ofthe ring ﬁnger, or the touching of two ﬁngers, the middle and thering ﬁnger—more like embryos of movement, yet sometimes be-coming a real movement, the touching of the tablecloth with anindex ﬁnger, the brushing of a ﬁngernail against a fold . . . it wasso far removed from Lena herself that I experienced it as a hugecountry full of internal movements, uncontrolled, subject nodoubt to the laws of statistics . . . and among these movementsthere was one, a slow coiling of her palm, a lazy contracting of herﬁngers into her palm, a shy, snuggling movement . . . it had caughtmy eye earlier . . . and yet, was it so entirely unrelated to me? Whocould know, but isn’t it curious, that it generally happened at thevery moment she lowered her eyes (I hardly saw those), this time
 Witold Gombrowiczshe did not raise them even once. Her husband’s hand, that dis-gusting, eroto-noneroto-erotic-nonerotic abomination, that odd-ity burdened by obligatory eroticism “because of her,” in connec-tion with her little hand, yet his hand, after all, was decent,presentable . . . it was also here, on the tablecloth, nearby . . . And,of course, the coilings of her hand might berelating to his hand, but they also might havehad an ever so faintly-slight connectionwith my watching from beneath downcast eyelids, although, onemust admit, the likelihood of it was almost nil, one in a million,but the hypothesis, in all its frailty, was explosive, an ignitingspark, like the breath that generates a tornado! . . . Because, whoknows, she might actually hate this man whom I didn’t want toobserve closely because I was afraid, on whose periphery I wasstraying constantly and who was also unknowable, just as much asshe was, after all . . . because, if it turned out, for instance, that she,by her husband’s side, gives herself over to coilings under my gaze,so what, she might be like that, her little sin could be hitched toher innocence and meekness, which (the innocence and the meek-ness) would in this case become a higher-grade perversion. Oh,the wild power of feeble thought! Oh, the exploding breath! Sup-per went on in full swing, Ludwik remembered something, tookout his notebook, Fuks prattled on, saying to Leon “she was a realshrew,” or “so many years at the bank, good Lord!” and Leon, hisbrows knit, his face like a bespectacled bald-head, recounted indetail, what and how, and why “well, fancy that” . . . “no, becauseshe didn’t use the tissue-paper” . . . “there was a table-top” . . . andFuks listened to avoid thinking about Drozdowski. I thought “andwhat if the coiling is for my sake,” and I knew it was a uselessthought, but, what’s this, a twist, a jolt, a cataclysm, and with asudden rush of her corpulence Roly-Poly dives under the table,
Cosmos she’s under the table, for a moment both the table and Roly-Polygo into a frenzy . . . what is it? It was the cat. She pulled it out fromunder the table, a mouse in its jaws.After so much bubbling, spurting, and sputtering of words thathad foamed in the violent cauldron of a cataract, the waters of ourstay at the table, that river, humming,ﬂowing, returned again toits channel, the cat was thrown out, again the table, the tablecloth,the lamp, glasses, Roly-Poly smoothes out some roughness in thetablecloth, Leon announces a forthcoming joke with his raisedﬁnger, Fuks stirs, the door opens, it’s Katasia, Roly-Poly says toLena “pass me the salad bowl,” emptiness, eternity, nothingness,peace, I’m back to she loves him she hates him she’s disenchantedenchanted happy unhappy, yet she might be all those things atonce, but most likely she wasn’t any of it for the simple reason thather little hand was too small, it was not a hand but a little hand, sowhat could she be with that little hand of hers, she couldn’t benothing, she was . . . she was . . . powerful in her e ﬀect, yet within herself she was nothing . . . confusion . . . confusion . . . confu-sion . . . matches, spectacles, a latch, a basket, an onion, cook-ies . . . cookies . . . so I should just look sideways, aside, askance,where the hands are, the sleeves, the shoulder, the neck, always onthe periphery, face to face from time to time only, once in a bluemoon, if there happens to be a pretext to look, under such cir-cumstances, what can one know, what can one see, but, if I couldlook to my heart’s content, not even then . . . ha, ha, ha, laughter,and I’m laughing, an anecdote, Leon’s anecdote, Roly-Polysqueaks, Fuks is twitching . . . Leon, his ﬁnger raised, shouts “onmy word of honor” . . . she is also laughing, but no more than justso, to adorn the general laughter with her laughter, everythingwith her is no more than just so . . . to adorn . . . but, even if I
 Witold Gombrowiczcould watch to my heart’s content I wouldn’t know, no, I wouldn’tknow, because between them there might be everything . . .“I need a thread and a small stick.”Fuks addressed this to me. Now what?I replied: “What for?”“I forgot to bring a compass . . . damnit . . . and I have to drawa circle, I need it for my graph. If I had a thread and a small stickthat would do it . . . A little stick and a piece of thread.”Ludwik said politely: “I have a compass upstairs, I’ll be glad toget it for you,” Fuks thanked him (the bottle and the cork, thatpiece of cork) yes, ah yes, I see, the slyboots, ah yes . . .This was to secretly inform the possible joker that we had no-ticed the arrow on our ceiling and had discovered the stick on thethread. This was just in case—if anyone had indeed been amusinghimself by arousing our interest with signs, let him know that wehad read them . . . that we’re awaiting further developments. Aslim chance, but what did it cost him to drop these few words? Isuddenly saw the family in the strange light of the following pos-sibility—the perpetrator is among them—and at that momentthe stick and the bird have emerged, the bird in the thicket and thestick at the far end of the garden, in its small grotto. Between thebird and the stick, I felt like I was suspended between the Northand South Poles, and our whole gathering, at the table, under thelamp, appeared to me to be derived from that other con ﬁguration, “in relation to” the bird and the stick—which I was not against,because this eeriness paved the way for yet another eeriness thattroubled me and yet fascinated me. O God! Considering the bird,considering the stick, perhaps ﬁnally I’ll also ﬁnd out what it is with the mouths. (Why? How? What an absurdity!)Intensity of attention led to distraction . . . and yet I submitted
Cosmos to it, it allowed me to be both here and somewhere else at the sametime, it provided release . . . I greeted the ascent of Katasia’s per-version, her circling here, there, closer, farther, above Lena, behindLena, with a kind of dull internal “aach,” like someone who hadchoked. Again, and even more so, the barely discernible, inciden-tal disﬁgurement of those slightly damaged lips linked in mymind—oh, how impudently—with the simple and seductiveclosing of my vis-à-vis’s little mouth, and this combination, weak-ening or intensifying, depending on the conﬁguration, led to con- tradictions such as licentious virginity, brutal timidity, wide-openclosing, shameless shame, icy fervor, sober drunkenness . . .“Y ou don’t understand, father,” said Ludwik.“What don’t I understand? What?!”“Organization.”“T o hell with organization! What organization?!”“The rational organization of society and of the world.”Leon attacked Ludwik across the table with his bald pate:“What do you want to organize? Organize how?”“Scientiﬁcally.”“Scientiﬁcally!” with his eyes, spectacles, wrinkles, with hisskull, Leon ﬁred a round of pity at him, he lowered his voice to awhisper: “My good man,” he asked conﬁdentially, “have you everput on your thinkie-cap? Organize! Y ou’re dreaming, cooking itup, you think you’ll catch it all in your grip just like that dum deedum, eh?”And he danced his predatory, clawing ﬁngers in front of Ludwik, then he spread them and blew into them: “Fie! Paf! It’sgone. Fy-eeee, pum, pum, pum, papapa, eeee . . . you under-stand . . . pua, pua, and what can you do, what’s it to you, to some-one like you, to you . . . It’s gone. Run through your ﬁngers. Gone.” He gazed at the salad bowl.
 Witold Gombrowicz“I can’t discuss this with you, father.”“No? Look at him! Why not?”“Because you lack the background, father.”“What background?”“Scientiﬁc.”“Scientiﬁ-ﬁc,” Leon said slowly, “conﬁde, if you please, conﬁde to my snow-white virgin bosom how you are going to, with thisscientiﬁc background of yours, or-ga-nize, how on earth, I askyou, how will you with this that there, in what manner, I ask you,with what and what for and whither and where, how will you, I askyou, with this and that, hither and thither, perchance to what end,how . . . ” he got stuck, he stared, speechless, Ludwik put some po-tatoes on his plate, and this yanked Leon out of his dumbness?“What do you know?!” he burst out bitterly,“Studies! Studies! Me,I haven’t studied, but for years I’ve thought . . . I’m still thinkingand thinking . . . since I left the bank I do nothing but think, myhead is bursting from thinking, and you, what’s it to you, whyshould you bother . . . Let it go, let it go! . . . ” But Ludwik was eat-ing a piece of lettuce, Leon slumped, calm ensued, Katasia closedthe cupboard, Fuks asked how many degrees is it, oh, it’s hot,Roly-Poly pushed the dishes toward Katasia, the king of Sweden,the Scandinavian peninsula, then on to tuberculosis, injections.The table was now more spacious, just cups with co ﬀee or tea, bread in a basket, and a few napkins already folded away—onlyone, Leon’s, remained spread out. I drank tea, no one stirred, leth-argy, everyone relaxed, their chairs slightly pushed back from thetable, Ludwik reached for the newspaper, Roly-Poly froze. Therewere times when she would freeze, expressionless, in a state oftotal emptiness, a state that would end with a sudden awakening,like the splash of a stone thrown in the water. Leon had a wart on
Cosmos his hand with a few hairs sticking out, he watched it, picked up atoothpick and twiddled the tiny hairs—watched again—thensprinkled a little salt from the tablecloth in between the hairs andlooked. He smiled. Ti-ri-ri.Lena’s palm appeared on the tablecloth, next to her teacup. Agreat palaver of events, unending factoids such as the croaking offrogs in the pond, mosquitoes swarming, a swarming of stars, acloud enclosing me, obliterating me, drifting with me, the ceilingwith the archipelago and the peninsulas, with dots and damppatches all the way to the boring whiteness of the window shade . . .an abundance of details, which may have related to Fuks’s and myclods of dirt, our little sticks, etc. . . . and maybe it was all some-how connected with Leon’s trivialities . . . I don’t know, perhaps Ionly thought like that because I was inclined to trivialities . . .fragmented . . . oh, I was so fragmented! . . .Katasia moved the ashtray toward Lena.Something hit me in the mouth sliding out cold shapelesssmack into mouth get out beat it the wire mesh with the legtwisted contorted and silence dead silence cavern nothing . . . andout of chaos, out of all the churning (after Katasia had left) themouth constellation appears, shining irrepressibly, glittering. Andbeyond all doubt: mouth is relating to mouth!I lowered my eyes, again I saw only the little hand on the table-cloth, doubly-mouthed doubly-lipped one way or the other two-fold innocently deﬁled pure slippery I stared at the little hand andwaited, suddenly the table swarmed with hands, what’s happen-ing, Leon’s little hand, Fuks’s little hand, Roly-Poly’s hands, Lud-wik’s hands, so many hands in the air . . . it’s a wasp! A wasp ﬂew into the room. Flew out. The hands calmed down. Again—a wave
 Witold Gombrowiczreceding, calm returns, I’m wondering about those hands, what’sthis, Leon addressed Lena: “Oh, my manifold adventure.”“Oh, my manifold adventure, give your daddy igniting phos-phorus” (matches). “Oh, my manifold adventure,” he sometimescalled her, or “bambi-pambi,” or “oh, rapture-go-slowly,” or some-thing else again. Roly-Poly brews herb tea, Ludwik reads, Fuksﬁnishes his tea, Ludwik folds the newspaper, Leon gazes, I thought,how so, how is it, did the hands swarm, rise in an uproar, becauseof the wasp, or because of the hand on the table . . . because,strictly speaking, there was no doubt that the hands had swarmedon account of the wasp . . . but who could guarantee that the waspwas not merely a pretext for the hands rising in connection withher little hand . . . A double meaning . . . and this doubling wasperhaps connected (who could tell?) with the Katasia-Lena dou-bling of mouths . . . with the sparrow-stick doubling . . . I wan-dered about. I strolled on the periphery. In the light of the lampthere was the darkness of the bushes beyond the road. T o sleep.The cork on the bottle. The piece of cork stuck to the neck of thebottle, it emerges and suggests . . .
Cosmos chapter 
The next ﬁne day arrived distracted, dry and glistening,shimmering, it was impossible to concentrate, out ofthe blueness of the sky rolled little round clouds,plump and immaculate. I immersed myself in mymanuscript because, after yesterday’s excesses, an inner austerityhad taken hold of me, asceticism, a distaste for quirkiness. ShouldI go to the stick? T o see if something new has happened, especiallyafter Fuks’s discrete hint last night at supper that we had discov-ered the stick and the thread?. . . But distaste for this a ﬀair, grotesque like an aborted fetus, held me back. I ground away at mywork, my head between my hands, anyway I knew that Fukswould go to the stick in my stead, even though he made no at-tempt to speak to me about it—we had exhausted the topic—yetI knew that, out of his inner emptiness, he’d go there, to the wall.I concentrated on my manuscript while he wandered about theroom,ﬁnally he left. And he came back, we ate breakfast in ourroom as usual (Katasia brought it to us), but he said nothing . . .
after napping until almost four in the afternoon, he ﬁnally spoke from his bed: “Come, I’ll show you something.”I didn’t answer—I wanted to humiliate him—no response wasthe most painful response. Humiliated, he kept quiet, he didn’tdare to insist, but minutes passed, I began to shave, ﬁnally I asked: “Is there anything new?” He replied: “Yes and no.”When I ﬁnished shaving he said: “So, come on, I’ll show you.” We went out, takingthe usual precautions in relation to the house with its window-panes watching, and we reached the stick. There was a waft of airfrom the heated wall and the smell of urine or apples, there was adrain nearby, yellow blades of grass . . . distance, extreme reaches,a separate life in hot silence, a buzzing. The stick was there, as wehad left it, it hung on the thread.“Look closely at this,” he pointed toward a pile of garbage in theopen door of the shed, “do you see anything?”“Nothing.”“Nothing?”“Nothing.”“Absolutely nothing?”“Nothing.”He stood in front of me, a tedium to us both.“Look at this whiﬄetree.”“What?”“Did you notice it yesterday?”“Maybe.”“Was it lying in exactly the same position? Hasn’t that changedsince yesterday?”He was tiresome—and he knew it, no illusions—he emanatedthe fatalism of a man who is bound to be a bore, he stood by the
 Witold Gombrowiczwall, all this was hollow in the extreme, futile. He insisted: “Try toremember . . . ” but I knew that he insisted out of boredom, andthis bored me as well. A yellow ant marched along the brokenwhiﬄetree. On top of the wall the stems of weeds were outlinedclearly against the sky, I didn’t remember it, how was I to re-member, maybe the whiﬄetree had changed its position, maybe ithadn’t changed its position . . . A yellow ﬂower.He would not accept defeat. He stood over me. It was unpleas-ant because in this remote place the emptiness of our boredommet with the emptiness of these supposed signs, with evidencethat wasn’t evidence, with this total nonsense—two emptinessesand the two of us caught between them. I yawned. He said:“Look closely, where is the whiﬄetree pointing?”“Where?”“T o Katasia’s little room.”Y es. The whiﬄetree aimed straight at her little room by thekitchen, in the addition, next to the house.“ A a...”“Exactly. If the whiﬄetree has not been touched, then it’s noth-ing, then it has no meaning. But if it has been touched, it’s in orderto direct us to Katasia . . . It’s someone, mind you, who got wise toit when I hinted at the stick and the thread yesterday at supper,and realizing that we were on the trail, comes here at night andpoints the whiﬄetree to Katasia’s room. It’s like a new arrow. Heknew that we’d come again to see if there’s a new sign.”“But how do you know that the whiﬄetree was touched?”“I’m not sure. But that’s how it seems to me. There is a trackwhere the wood scraps have been moved, as if the whi ﬄetree lay in a diﬀerent position before . . . And look at the three pebbles . . .
Cosmos and the three sticks . . . and the three blades of grass that are pulledout . . . and the three buttons, from a saddle probably . . . Don’tyou see anything?”“See what?”“They seem to form triangles pointing at the whi ﬄetree, as if someone had wanted to draw our attention to the whi ﬄetree . . . they seem to create, don’t you think, a kind of rhyme directed atthe whiﬄetree. It’s . . . perhaps . . . what do you think?”I took my eyes oﬀthe yellow ant that appeared on and oﬀbe- tween the leather straps, rushing to the left, to the right, back andforth, I hardly listened to Fuks, in one ear and out the other, howidiotic, misery, abject misery, humiliation, this bilious state ofours, the nasty taste of it, the nonsense, all ﬂoating above the pileof rubble and other odds and ends, by the wall, as well as his car-roty mug, bug-eyed and disdained. I again started to explain—“who would bother, who would make up such insigni ﬁcant signs, almost invisible, who would ﬁgure that we’d catch on to the changein the whiﬄetree’s direction . . . no one with all his marbles . . . ”But he interrupted me: “Who says it’s someone with all his mar-bles? Another thing: how do you know how many signs he’s mak-ing up? Perhaps we’ve discovered only one of many . . . ” With awave of his arm he encompassed the garden and the house: “Per-haps the place is swarming with signs . . . ”We stood there—a clod of dirt, a cobweb—and we knew thatwe wouldn’t leave this alone. What else did we have going? I tooka piece of brick in my hand, I looked at it, set it back and said:“Well then? Shall we follow the line of the whi ﬄetree?” He laughed self-consciously.“Can’t be helped. Y ou understand, don’t you. For the sake ofpeace. T omorrow is Sunday. It’s her day oﬀ. We’ll have to inspect
 Witold Gombrowiczher room, we’ll see if there is anything to be seen . . . And if not, itwill be the end of all this bother!”I ﬁxed my eyes on the rubble, so did he—as if I wanted to readfrom it a slight but swinish, sulky slipaway of a lip and, indeed, itseemed that the rubble, the whiﬄetree of the cart, the leatherstraps, the garbage began to pulsate with an atmosphere of rovingslipperiness, with a proﬁle of disﬁgurement . . . together with theashtray, with the wire net of the bed, with the closing and partingof lips . . . and it all vibrated, seethed, reaching Lena, which terri-ﬁed me because, I wondered, how on earth were we going to actagain and, by acting, bring about . . . we’ll bring this whi ﬄetree into action, then I’ll get at the mouth by way of the rubble—which thrilled me—because, I thought, aha, now we’ll begin toact, and by our action we’ll penetrate this riddle, indeed, yes, yes,let’s work our way into Katasia’s little room and search it, look,check on it! Check! Oh, an all-clarifying action! And, oh, an ob-scuring action, in the dead of night, leading into a chimera!And so, in spite of everything, I felt better—our return alongthe gravel path was like the return of two detectives—working onour detailed plans allowed me to survive with honor until the nextday. Supper passed peacefully, my ﬁeld of vision was increasinglyconﬁned to the tablecloth, I found it increasingly di ﬃcult to look at people, I watched the tablecloth where Lena’s little hand lay . . .quieter today, without obvious quivering, (yet this could have ac-tually been proof that she was the one who had set up the whi ﬄe- tree!) . . . and the other hands, Leon’s hand for instance, sluggish,or Ludwik’s erotic-nonerotic hand, and Roly-Poly’s hand like apotato atop a beetroot, her little ﬁst sticking out of her patulousold crone’s arm and shoulder, evoking a silently mounting un-pleasantness . . . becoming even more unpleasant in the vicinity of
Cosmos the elbow, where a chapped redness eventually continued asbluish-gray and violet bays, leading into other recesses. Complex,wearisome conﬁgurations of hands, similar to the conﬁgurations on the ceiling, on the walls . . . everywhere . . . Leon’s hand stoppeddrumming, he lifted a ﬁnger of his left hand with two ﬁngers of his right hand and held it thus, looking at it with attention thatfroze into a dreamy smile. The conversation of course, high above,above the hands, went on unceasingly, but only this and thatreached me, they touched on various subjects, and at one pointLudwik asked what do you think, father, imagine, ten soldiersmarching Indian ﬁle, what do you think, father, how long wouldit take to exhaust all the possible conﬁgurations of the soldiers inﬁle by moving, for example, the third man to the place of the ﬁrst, and so on . . . assuming that we make one change each day? Leonpondered: three monthies? Ludwik said:“T en thousand years. It’s been calculated.”“Oh, Ludwik,” Leon said, “oh, Ludwik . . . Ludwik . . . ” He fellsilent and sat bristling. It seemed that Ludwik’s word “con ﬁgura- tion” was in some way tied to the “conﬁgurations” that had oc-curred to me, it seemed like a peculiar coincidence that he men-tioned conﬁgurations of soldiers, just as I was drowning in somany conﬁgurations myself—wasn’t it almost like putting myown anxieties into words?—oh, the “almost,” how many times al-ready had this “almost” made my life miserable—yet one also hasto take into account the fact that I was struck by the story aboutthe soldiers because it connected with my own anxieties, andtherefore I singled it out from many other things which they alsotalked about. And so it was this coincidence that was partially (oh,only partially!) of my own doing—and that’s exactly what was sodiﬃcult, awful, misleading, I could never know to what degree I
 Witold Gombrowiczwas the perpetrator, conﬁguring the conﬁgurations around me,oh, the criminal keeps returning to the scene of the crime! Whenone considers what a great number of sounds, forms reach us atevery moment of our existence . . . the swarm, the roar, the river . . .nothing is easier than to conﬁgure! Conﬁgure! For a split secondthis word took me by surprise like a wild beast in a dark forest,but it soon sank into the hurly-burly of the seven people sittinghere, talking, eating, supper going on, Katasia handed Lena theashtray . . .“We’ll have to explain everything, clarify, get to the bottom ofit . . . ” but I didn’t think inspection of the little room would yieldanything, our project for tomorrow would merely help us copewith the strange dependence of mouth on mouth, city on city,star on star . . . and, in the ﬁnal analysis, what’s so strange aboutmouth returning to mouth, when all the time, unceasingly, onething was returning me to another, one thing lurked behind an-other, behind Ludwik’s hand was Lena’s hand, behind a cup aglass, behind the streak on the ceiling an island, the world was in-deed a kind of screen and did not manifest itself other than bypassing me on and on—I was just the bouncing ball that objectsplayed with!Suddenly something tapped.The sound of someone tapping a stick against a stick—a brief,dry sound. Not loud—even though it was a distinct sound, so dis-tinct that it rose above all the other sounds. Did someone tap? Didsomething tap? I went numb. Something like “this is the begin-ning”ﬂashed through my head, I was petriﬁed, get on with it, you,the apparition, crawl out! . . . But the noise was lost in time, noth-ing happened, perhaps it was the creak of one of the chairs . . .nothing important . . .
Cosmos Nothing important. Next day, Sunday, introduced turmoil intothe ﬂow of our life, although today, like any other day, Katasiawoke me and stood over me for a moment out of sheer friendli-ness, but it was Mrs. Wojtys herself who took care of cleaning ourroom and, while rolling around with her dustcloth, recountedhow in Drohobycz they had a “lovely ﬁrst ﬂoor in a villa, with amenities,” she used to rent rooms with board, or without, thensix years in Pu¬tusk “in a comfortable apartment on the thirdﬂoor,” but besides regular tenants she often had as many as sixboarders “from the city” on her hands, usually older people, withassorted ailments, so, a soft pap for this one, soup for another,nothing acidic for yet another, until one day I told myself, no, nomore of this, enough, I can’t do it, and I said this to my old fogies,you should have seen their despair, oh, dear lady, who will takecare of us, so I replied: can’t you see, I put too much heart intothis, I wear myself down to the bone, why do it, why should I bekilling myself, and especially since I’ve had to look after Leon allmy life, you have no idea, this and that, always something, I justdon’t know how this man would have managed without me,coﬀee in bed all his life, all his life, fortunately that’s how I am, Ihate to be idle, from morning ’til night, from night ’til morning,but also enjoying ourselves, visiting, entertaining guests, youknow, Leon’s aunt is married to count Koziebrodzki, if you please,and when I married Leon his family stuck up their noses, evenLeon himself was so scared of his auntie, the countess, that hedidn’t introduce me to her for two years, so I say, Leon, don’t yoube scared, I’ll show this auntie of yours a thing or two, and one dayI read in the newspaper there’s a charity ball, and that the count-ess Koziebrodzka is on the organizing committee, I don’t tell Leonanything, I just say Leon, we’ll go to the ball, well, I tell you, for
 Witold Gombrowiczabout two weeks I was secretly getting ready, two seamstresses, ahairdresser, massages, I even had a pedicure to give myself courage,I borrowed T ela’s jewelry, Leon was dumbstruck when he saw me,I’m calm, we walk into the ballroom, music, I take Leon under thearm and we head straight for the countess and, imagine, she turnedher back on us! She insulted me! So I say to Leon, Leon your auntis a fathead, and I spat on the ﬂoor, while he, you know, not aword, he’s like that, talk, talk, but when it comes to doing some-thing, he does nothing, he beats around the bush, he wriggles out,but later, when we lived in Kielce, I made preserves, lots of neigh-bors visited us, they ordered my preserves months in advance, shefell silent, she went on dusting as if she hadn’t said anything, untilFuks asked:“Then what?”So then she said that one of her tenants in Pu¬tusk was a con-sumptive and I had to serve him cream three times a day “to thepoint that it was disgusting” . . . and she left. What did it allmean? What was the sense of it? What was behind it? And the glasstumbler? Why did I notice the tumbler yesterday, in the livingroom, by the window, on the table, together with two spools ofthread—why did I look at it as I passed by—was it worth theattention—should I go down, look again, check? Fuks too musthave been checking up on things in secret, studying, lookingaround, pondering, he too was extremely scattered—stupidlyscattered. Fuks, yes . . . but he didn’t have even one hundredth ofthe reasons I had . . .Lena was circulating like blood in this nonsense!I couldn’t resist the impression that Lena was behind it all,striving toward me, straining to force her way, shyly, secretly . . . Icould almost see her: straying about the house, drawing on ceil-
Cosmos ings, setting up the whiﬄetree, hanging the stick, making ﬁgures out of objects, she darts along the walls, around corners . . .Lena . . . Lena . . . Forcing her way to me . . . maybe even pleadingfor help! Nonsense! Yes, nonsense, but on the other hand, couldn’tthose two anomalies—that “union” of mouths and those signs—have anything in common? Nonsense! Yes, nonsense, but couldsomething within me as intense as the contamination of Lena byKatasia’s lips be just my imagination? We had supper alone withRoly-Poly because Lena went with her husband to visit their ac-quaintances, Leon was out playing bridge, it was Sunday, Katasia’sday oﬀ, she had left right after lunch.Supper, seasoned with Roly-Poly’s incessant voice—when Leonwasn’t around, chattering beset her—on she went, that the ten-ants, that with the tenants, that her whole life, you gentlemen haveno idea, a meal for this one, sheets for that one, enema for yet an-other, this one wants a space heater, goes on about a spaceheater . . . I hardly listened, something about “with whores” . . .“a bottle behind the bed, he’s almost dying, yet the bottles” . . .“I tell him, whims, whims, but you know where your scarf is” . . .“I fought tooth and nail, worked myself to the bone, I’m not madeof stone” . . . “Oh, the rabble, so help me God” . . . “it’s a holy ter-ror, that human ﬁlth, dear Jesus” . . . her beady eyes followed ourfood consumption, her bust resting on the table, and on her elbowthe skin peeling oﬀand passing into pink violet, just as on the ceil-ing where the pustulation of the central bay passed into a pale, yel-lowish rash . . . “If it weren’t for me, they’d all be dead” . . . “oftenin the night when he groaned” . . . “so they transferred Leon, andwe rented” . . . She was like the ceiling, behind her ear she hadwhat looked like a hardened blister, and then a forest began, herhair,ﬁrst there seemed to be two or three rings of hair, then the
 Witold Gombrowiczforest, grayish-black, thick, rolling up, curled, here and there inlocks, here and there in tufts, then smooth again, falling down, theskin on her nape suddenly very delicate, white, then nearby ascratch as if made by a ﬁngernail, and a reddened area, then some-thing like a blemish above her shoulder, while at the edge of theblouse a staleness began, an area of wear and tear that disappearedunder the blouse, and there, under the blouse, continued fartherdown to various warts, adventures . . . She was like the ceiling . . .“When we lived in Drohobycz” . . . “tonsillitis, then rheumatism,stones in the liver” . . . She was, like the ceiling, beyond grasp, in-exhaustible, inﬁnite in its islands, archipelagos, lands . . . Aftersupper we waited until she went to bed and, around ten o’clock,we went into action.What phenomena would be unleashed by our action?Forcing our way into Katasia’s room presented no di ﬃculties, we knew she always left a key by her window that was overgrownwith ivy. The diﬃculty was that we had no assurance that the per-son who was leading us by the nose—assuming that someone wasleading us by the nose—did not lie in ambush spying on us froma hiding place . . . someone who could even raise hell for all weknew? We spent a lot of time wandering about near the kitchen tosee if anyone was watching us—but the house, the windows, thelittle garden, lay peacefully in the night over which swept thick,tousled, clouds, and from behind them the crescent moon sailedout, racing. Dogs chased each other among the little trees. Wewere afraid of ridicule. Fuks showed me a small box that he heldin his hand.“What is it?”“A frog. It’s alive. I caught it today.”“What’s that all about?”
Cosmos “If anyone catches us, we can say that we sneaked into her roomto put the frog in her bed . . . As a joke!”His face, rebuﬀed by Drozdowski, was white-carroty-ﬁsh-like. He had a frog, all right, that was clever! And the frog, one had toadmit, was not out of place, its slipperiness circling round Kata-sia’s slipperiness . . . I was astonished, even worried by his comingup with the frog . . . and even more so because the frog was not allthat far removed from the sparrow—the sparrow and the frog—the frog and the sparrow—was something hiding behind this?Did it mean anything? Fuks said:“Let’s go and see what’s happening with the sparrow. We haveto wait a while anyway.”We went. Out the door, in the bushes, we encountered the fa-miliar darkness, the familiar smell, we approached the familiarplace, but our gaze beat in vain against the blackness, or ratheragainst a multitude of various blacknesses e ﬀacing everything— there were black caverns caving in, next to other holes, spheres,layers, poisoned by semi-existence, and this ﬂowed together into a kind of concoction that had a restraining, opposing e ﬀect. I had a ﬂashlight, but I wasn’t free to use it. The sparrow had to be aheadof us, by two paces, we knew where, but we couldn’t reach it withour gaze that was being devoured by something negating it, bydarkness. Finally . . . the bird loomed as if it were the center of aconﬁguration, a thickening no bigger than a pear . . . it hung . . .“Here it is.”In the silent darkness the frog in the box announced itself . . .not that it made a sound, yet its existence, excited by the sparrow’sexistence, made itself known. We were with the frog . . . it washere, with us, in the presence of the sparrow, the sparrow was its
 Witold Gombrowiczcrony in the frog-sparrow realm, and it brought the slippery lipslipaway to me . . . and the trio of sparrow-frog-our-little-Katasiapushed me into her mouth cavern, turning the black cavern of thebushes into her gaping mug, equipped with the a ﬀected frolic of her lip . . . leaping aside. Lust. Swinish business. I stood motion-less, Fuks was already retreating from the bushes, “nothing new,”he whispered, and, when we came out onto the road, the nightwith its sky, its moon, with its plenitude of silver-edged clouds,blazed forth. T o action! A frantic wish for action, for a cleansingwind, beat within me, I was ready to attack anything!Y et this action of ours was pitiful, God be merciful—two con-spirators with a frog, following the line of a whi ﬄetree. Once more we swept the scene with our gaze: the house and the faintlyvisible trunks of the little trees, white with lime, the huge treesgrowing densely in the thicket, the spreading expanse of the littlegarden—I felt for the key at the window, in the ivy, and after in-serting it into the lock I gently lifted the door on its hinges so itwouldn’t creak. At this time the frog in the box ceased to be im-portant, it moved to the background. Instead, when the dooropened, the cavern of the small, low room that gave o ﬀa bitter, oppressive odor, like that of a laundry room, or bread, or herbs,that cavern of Katasia’s excited me, the botched-up mouth suck-led all over me, sucking me, and I had to be careful not to let Fukscatch on to the agitation in my breathing.He went in with the ﬂashlight and the frog, while I remained inthe partly open door to stand watch.The dimmed light of the ﬂashlight, muted by a handkerchief,slid over the bed, the wardrobe, the little table, the wastepaper bas-ket, the shelf, revealing in turn other places, corners, fragments,
Cosmos undergarments, odds and ends of clothes, a broken comb, a smallmirror, a plate with coins, gray soap, objects and objects emergingone after another, as in a movie, while outside clouds followedclouds—at the door I was between the two processions: of objectsand of clouds. And even though each one of the objects in the littleroom was hers, Katasia’s, they acquired the ability to express heronly when taken as a whole, creating a substitute for her presence,a second presence that I was violating through Fuks—with hisﬂashlight—while I was standing to one side, on watch. Violatingslowly. The spot of light moving, jumping aside, stopped momen-tarily on something, as if in meditation, to then rummage again,ferret, grope in stubborn search for swinishness—that’s what welooked for, that’s what we sniﬀed for. Oh, swinish, swinish busi-ness! Meanwhile the frog was in the box on the table where he hadleft it.Servile inferiority, born of a dirty and jagged comb, of a greasymirror, of a threadbare, damp towel—a servant’s chattels, alreadyurban, yet still a villager’s, simple in nature, we pawed throughthem to gain access to the slippery, twirled-up sinfulness that waslurking here, in this mouth-like cavern, yet hiding its everytrace . . . We groped for depravity, perversity, for villainy. It had tobe here somewhere! Suddenly the ﬂashlight came upon a largephotograph in a corner past the wardrobe, and out of the frameemerged Katasia . . . with her mouth unblemished! Imagine that!Pure guileless mouth, good-hearted country mouth!On a much younger, rounder face! Katasia, all decked out, witha festive décolletage, on a bench under a palm tree behind whichone could see the bow of a boat, a stout foreman with a mustachein a stiﬀcollar holding Katasia by her little hand . . . Katasia smil-ing pleasantly . . .
 Witold GombrowiczWhen, waking at night, we could swear that the window is onthe right, the door behind our head, one single orienting sign,such as the light from the window or the murmur of the clock, isenough for everything to fall into place in our heads, all at onceand in a deﬁnitive way, just so. What now? Reality intruded withlightning speed—everything returned to normal, as if called toorder. Katasia: a respectable housekeeper who had injured her lipin a car accident; we: a couple of lunatics . . .Dejected, I looked at Fuks. In spite of this he kept on searching,the ﬂashlight ferreted again, bills on the table, stockings, holy pic-tures, Christ and the Mother of God with a bouquet—but what ofthis search? He was merely making the best of it.“Get ready,” I whispered. “Let’s go.”All possibility of swinish lust vanished from the illuminatedobjects, and instead, the illuminating itself became swinish—thegroping, the sniﬃng around, took on a suicidal character—thetwo of us in this little room were like two lascivious apes. He re-ciprocated my gaze with a haggard smile and continued to wan-der over the room with the ﬂashlight, it was obvious that his head was totally empty, nothing there, nothing, nothing, likesomeone who realizes that he has lost everything he was carrying,and yet continues on his way . . . and his failure with Drozdowskichummed up with this failure, it all ﬂowed together into one bigﬂop . . . with an obscene, whorehouse smile he peeped into Kata-sia’s ribbons, cotton-wool, dirty stockings, shelves, her little cur-tains, from the shadow where I stood I saw how he did it . . . justfor revenge and for the hell of it, with his own lasciviousness re-taliating for the fact that she had ceased to be lascivious. Pawingaround, the spot of light dancing round a comb, the heel of ashoe . . . But all for nothing! In vain! All this made no sense any
Cosmos more, it slowly fell apart like a parcel after the string is cut, objectsgrew indiﬀerent, our sensuality was dying. And the threateningmoment approached when one wouldn’t know what to do.Then I noticed something.This something could have been nothing, but it also might notbe nothing. Most likely not important . . . but in any case . . .As a matter of fact, he shone the light on a needle that was pe-culiar because it was driven into the tabletop.This would not have been worthy of attention were it not that Ihad already noticed something even stranger, namely the nib of apen driven into a lemon rind. So, after he ﬁngered the needle thathad been driven in, I took his hand and led the ﬂashlight to the nib—the sole purpose being to restore to our presence here thesemblance of an investigation.But then the ﬂashlight began to move briskly and after a mo-ment found something—namely a nail ﬁle on top of the chest ofdrawers. The nail ﬁle was driven into a little cardboard box. I hadnot noticed the nail ﬁle before, the ﬂashlight showed it to me as ifasking, “what do you think?”The nail ﬁle—the nib—the needle . . . the ﬂashlight was now like a dog that had caught a scent, it jumped from object to object,and we discovered two more “driven-ins”: two safety pins driveninto a cardboard. Not much. Not much, and yet, wretched as wewere, this gave new direction to our action, the ﬂashlight worked jumping, examining . . . and here was something else . . . a naildriven into the wall, strange in its location, about an inch abovethe ﬂoor. Yet the strangeness of the nail wasn’t enough in itself,it was our illuminating the nail that was, to some extent, an abuseon our part . . . There was nothing else . . . nothing . . . we stillsearched, but our search was coming to an end, in the sultry
 Witold Gombrowiczcavern of the room decay was setting in . . . ﬁnally the ﬂashlight stopped . . . what next?He opened the door, we began to retreat. Before the actual de-parture he brieﬂy shone the light straight into Katasia’s mouth.Leaning against the recess of the window I felt a hammer undermy hand and I whispered “a hammer,” perhaps because the ham-mer was connected to the nail driven into the wall. No matter.Let’s go. We closed the door, returned the key to its place, “thewind is really blowing way up there”—he whispered beneath thedome of speeding clouds, he, the ne’er-do-well, the rebu ﬀed one, the irritating one, what’s he to me, it’s my own fault, never mind,the house stood immobile before us, beyond the road tall sprucesstood like posts, small trees stood in the little garden, it remindedme of a dance when the music suddenly stops and all the couplesstand dumbstruck, it was all so stupid.Now what? Go back and go to sleep? Some kind of depletionwas encircling me, a weakening of everything. I didn’t feel a thing.He turned to me to say something, when suddenly a pounding—forceful and resonant, shattered the calm!I went numb—it came from behind the house, from the direc-tion of the road, the furious blows came from there, someone waspounding! Like with a hammer! Furious blows with a hammer,heavy, iron blows, pounding blow after blow, bang, bang, ﬁercely, someone pounding with all their might! The din of iron in thenoiseless night was astounding, almost out of this world . . . Wasit against us? We took cover by the wall as if those blows, incom-patible with everything that surrounded us, must have beenaimed at us.The pounding did not cease. I looked around the corner andcaught Fuks by the sleeve. There was Mrs. Roly-Poly.
Cosmos Mrs. Roly-Poly! In a robe with wide sleeves, and within thosewide-swept sleeves, she was panting and pounding, lifting a ham-mer, or an axe, pounding into the trunk of a tree, stark ravingmad. Driving in? What was she driving in? Why this driving-in,desperate and furious . . . that . . . that we had left in Katasia’s littleroom . . . and now it was mightily raging here, and the roar of ironreigned!The small hammer that I touched with my elbow as we wereleaving the little room transformed itself into this hammer, into thepins, the needles, the pen nibs, and into the driven-in nails, reach-ing their utmost in this sudden unleashing. As soon as I thought ofthe connection, I pushed away the absurd thought, o ﬀwith it, but at the same moment another driving-in, something like a crash . . .resounded from inside the house . . . From somewhere above,from the second ﬂoor, but faster and more frequent, accompany-ing the other blows, corroborating the driving-in and bursting mybrain, panic writhed in the night, a frenzy, it was like an earth-quake! Was it coming from Lena’s room? I broke away from Fuksand rushed into the house, I hurried upstairs . . . was it Lena?But, as I ran up the stairs, suddenly everything became dumb-struck—and I, already on the second ﬂoor, stood still, panting,because the din that drove me on had ceased. Silence. I even had atotally calm thought, why not calm down and simply go back toour room. But Lena’s door, the third one in the hallway, was infront of me, while within me the banging, the driving-in were stillhappening, the din, the hammer, the small hammer, the needles,nails, the driving-in, the driving-in, oh, to bang through to Lena,to keep banging through to her . . . therefore, throwing myself ather door I began to strike it, to pound it with my ﬁsts! With all my might!
 Witold GombrowiczSilence.It ﬂashed through my head that if they open the door, I’ll ex-claim “thieves!” to somehow justify myself. Y et nothing—every-thing had become quiet, I could hear nothing, nothing, nothing, Iretreated silently and quickly, I went downstairs. But downstairsall was quiet too. Emptiness. Not a living soul. No Fuks, no Roly-Poly. The lack of response from Lena’s room was easily explained,they weren’t there, they hadn’t yet returned from their visit, theruckus hadn’t come from there—but where has Fuks gone? Wherewas Roly-Poly? I went round the house, close to the wall so that noone could see me from the windows—the frenzy had dissipatedwithout a trace, only the trees remained, only the paths, the gravelbeneath the racing moon, nothing more. Where was Fuks? I feltlike crying, I was close to sitting down and crying.Suddenly I see, on the second ﬂoor, light shining from awindow—in Lena and Ludwik’s room.I see, so they are there, they heard my banging! Why didn’t theyopen the door? What am I to do? Again I had nothing to do, noth-ing, I was unemployed. What then? What? Go to our room, un-dress, go to sleep? Or lie in ambush somewhere? What? What?Cry? Their window on the second ﬂoor was not shaded, lightshone from it . . . and . . . and . . . just across from it, behind thefence, stood a dense, wide-spreading spruce, if I climbed it, I couldlook in . . . A wild idea, but its wildness was in keeping with thewildness that had just come to an end . . . what else was there forme to do?The uproar, the confusion that had just taken place made suchan idea possible, it was facing me, just like this tree, nothing elsewas facing me. I went onto the road, forced my way to the trunkof the spruce and began laboriously climbing that coarse and
Cosmos prickly monster. Oh, to bang my way through to Lena! T o reachLena . . . the residue of that other banging rattled within me, andagain I strove toward it . . . all the rest, Katasia’s room, her photo,the pins, Roly-Poly’s banging, everything receded before my mainand only purpose of banging through to Lena. I climbed carefully,from branch to branch, higher and higher.It was not easy, it took a long time, my curiosity was becomingfeverish: to see her, to see her—to see her with him—what will Isee?. . . After that thumping, pounding—what will I see?  My re-cent trembling in front of her door trembled on within me, furi-ously. What will I see? I had already swept my eyes over the ceil-ing, the upper part of the wall, and the lamp.Finally I saw.I was dumbstruck.He was showing her a kettle.A kettle.She sat on a small chair, by the table, with a bath towel thrownover her back like a shawl. He stood in his vest, held the kettle inhis hand and was showing it to her. She was looking at the kettle.Saying something. He was talking.The kettle.I had been ready for anything. But not for the kettle. One mustunderstand what is the drop that makes the cup over ﬂow. What is it that’s “too much.” There is something like an excess of reality, itsswelling beyond endurance. After so many objects that I couldn’teven enumerate, after the needles, frogs, sparrow, stick, whi ﬄe- tree, pen nib, leather, cardboard, et cetera, chimney, cork, scratch,drainpipe, hand, pellets, etc. etc., clods of dirt, wire mesh, wire,bed, pebbles, toothpick, chicken, warts, bays, islands, needle, andso on and so on and on, to the point of tedium, to excess, and now
 Witold Gombrowiczthis kettle popping up like a Jack-in-the-box, without rhyme orreason, on its own,gratis, a luxury of disorder, a splendor of chaos.Enough is enough. My throat tightened. I won’t be able to swallowall this. I won’t be able to handle it. Enough. Turn back. Go home.She took oﬀthe towel. She had no blouse. Nakedness assailedme from her breasts, her shoulders. Bending her nudity she beganto pull down her stockings, the husband spoke again, she an-swered, she took oﬀa stocking, he placed his foot on a chair andwas unlacing his shoe. I delayed my retreat, I thought that now Iwould ﬁnd out what she’s like, what she’s like with him whennaked, is she vile, mean, dirty, slippery, sensual, sacred, tender,pure, faithful, fresh, attractive, perhaps a coquette? Perhaps justeasy? Or profound? Perhaps just obstinate, or disillusioned, bored,indiﬀerent, passionate, cunning, evil, angelic, timid, impudent, I’llﬁnally see! Then her thighs showed, once, twice, I’ll soon know,I’ll ﬁnally ﬁnd out,ﬁnally something will reveal itself to me . . .The kettle.He picked it up, moved it from the table to the ﬂoor and went to the door.The light went out.I looked closely but saw nothing, with my unseeing gaze pierc-ing the darkness of the cavern I kept looking, what could they bedoing? What were they doing? And how were they doing it? At thismoment anything could be happening there. There was no ges-ture, no touch, that would not be possible, the darkness was trulyinscrutable, she writhed or she didn’t writhe, or she was embar-rassed, or she loved, or else there was nothing, or something en-tirely diﬀerent, or it was baseness, or horror, I’ll never ﬁnd out anything. I began to climb down and, letting myself down slowly,I thought that even if she were a child with very blue eyes she
Cosmos could be a monster as well—blue-eyed and childish. So what doesone know?I will never know anything about her.I jumped to the ground, brushed myself oﬀ, slowly walked to- ward the house, in the sky all was rush and speed, entire herdssped on, disheveled, the whiteness of their luminous edges, theblackness of their nuclei, everything sped on below the moon thatalso raced, swam out, glided, dimmed, then emerged immaculate,the heavens were embraced by two contradictory motions, speed-ing and calm—and I, walking on, wondered whether to throweverything out the window, whether to get rid of the entire ballastand say “I pass,” because,ﬁnally, Katasia’s lip, as was evident fromthe photograph, was a purely mechanical blemish. So why did Ineed this?And on top of it all, the kettle . . .Why did I need the association of the mouths—her mouthwith Katasia’s? I won’t do it anymore. I’ll leave it alone.I was reaching the porch. Lena’s cat, Davie, sat on the banisterand, on seeing me, it stood up and stretched itself so that I wouldtickle it. I caught the cat tightly by the throat, I began to strangleit—what am I doing—ﬂashed through me like lightning, butthen I thought: too bad, it’s too late, I tightened my ﬁngers with all my might. I strangled it. It hung limp.What now, what next, I was on the porch with a strangled cat inmy hands, something had to be done with the cat, lay it downsomewhere, hide it? However, I had no idea where. Perhaps buryit? Yet who’d be burying anything at night!? Throw it out on theroad, as if a car had run over it—or perhaps into the bushes, to-ward the sparrow? I deliberated, the cat weighed heavily on me, Icouldn’t make up my mind, all was quiet, but suddenly my eye
 Witold Gombrowiczfastened on a tough string that tied a small tree to its pole, one ofthose trees white with lime, I untied the string, made a loop, Ilooked around wondering if anyone could see me (the house wasasleep, no one would have believed that not so long ago a din hadswept through here), I remembered there was a hook in the wall,I don’t know what for, perhaps for hanging laundry, I carried thecat there, it wasn’t far, about twenty paces from the porch, I hungit on the hook. It hung like the sparrow, like the stick, completingthe picture. What next? I was so tired that I was barely alive, I wasa bit fearful of returning to the room, what if Fuks is there, notasleep, he’ll be asking questions . . . But as soon as I quietly openedthe door, it turned out he was fast asleep. I too fell asleep.
Cosmos chapter 
Katasia stands over me, going on at length, such vil-lainy, someone hanged Davie, Davie is hanging on ahook in the garden, who hanged him, God havemercy on us, what a disgraceful thing to hang Lena’scat! This woke me brutally. The cat had been hanged. I hanged thecat. I cast an uneasy eye toward Fuks’s bed, it was vacant, appar-ently he was already by the cat, and this gave me a moment of soli-tude to come to grips with . . .The news surprised me, as if I were not the strangler. T o ﬁnd myself, with a single leap out of sleep, in something so unbeliev-able, for God’s sake why did I strangle the cat? Now I rememberedthat, while I was strangling the cat, I felt the same banging throughto Lena that I had felt when I was storming at her door—yes, I wasgetting at her by strangling her beloved cat—I could only havedone it in a ﬁt of madness! But why did I hang it on the hook, whatrecklessness, what stupor! And, what’s more, contemplating thisstupor, half-dressed, with a dubious smile on my shriveled facethat I saw in the mirror, I experienced as much satisfaction as I
did confusion—as if I had played a prank. I even whispered, “It’shanging,” with joy, with delight. What am I to do? How am I to ex-tricate myself from this? The people downstairs must be going onabout it—had anyone seen me?I strangled the cat.This fact threw me. The cat had been strangled and was hang-ing on a hook, and there was nothing I could do but go down andpretend I knew nothing. But still, why did I hang it? So many is-sues piling up, so many threads interweaving, Lena, Katasia, signs,pounding, et cetera, take even the frog, or the ashtray, et cetera. Iwas lost in the tumult, it even occurred to me that perhaps I hadkilled it because of the kettle, because of the excess, to top it all oﬀ, an extra horse to the cart, in other words the strangling, likethe kettle, was supernumerary. No, that wasn’t true! I had notstrangled the cat because of the kettle. What was the link then,what did the cat even have to do with it? I had no time to think, Ihad to go down and confront a situation that was, even withoutthe cat, uncanny and ﬁlled with the night’s quaint oddities . . .I went downstairs. The house was empty, I surmised that every-one was in the little garden. But before appearing at the door ofthe porch, I looked out the window from behind the curtain. Thewall. On the wall the cat’s body. Hanging on a hook. In front of thewall people standing, among them Lena—she’s farther o ﬀ,r e duced in size, it all looked like a symbol. T o make my appearanceon the porch was not easy, it was like a jump into the unknown . . .and what if someone had seen me, what if in the next moment I’llhave to mumble something, beside myself with shame? I walkedslowly along the gravel path, the sky like sauce, the sun dissolvedin a whitish expanse, again the foreboding heat, what a summer!As I was getting closer the cat became more distinct, its tongue
 Witold Gombrowiczprotruding from the side of its jaws, its peepers thrust out of theirorbits . . . it hung. It would have been better, I thought, if this werenot a cat, a cat by its very nature is already awful, the cat’s softness,furriness, are as if grounded in a mad screeching and scratching,a horrifying hissing, yes, hissing, a cat is made for stroking, butalso for torturing, although it’s a kitten, it is also a tomcat . . . Iwalked slowly to gain time, because its sight astonished me in thedaytime that followed my nighttime act, when it had been less vis-ible and intertwined with that night’s wonders. It seemed thatsluggishness aﬀected everyone, they too barely moved, while Fuks,much to my amusement, hunched over, studied the wall and theground below it. Yet Lena’s beauty puzzled me, it was so suddenand amazing, and I thought in terror: oh, how much more beau-tiful she has become since yesterday!Leon asked me, hands in his pockets: “What do you make ofthis?” A tuft of pomaded hair stuck out above his baldness, like aship’s lookout.I breathed a sigh of relief. They didn’t know I had done it. Noone had seen me.I turned to Lena: “How sad for you!”I looked at her, she wore a soft, coﬀee-colored blouse, a navyskirt, she was nestling into herself, her mouth soft, her armsagainst her body like the arms of a recruit . . . and the palms of herhands, her feet, her little nose, her little ears were too small, toopetite. At ﬁrst this annoyed me. I had killed her cat, I did it to herbrutally, solidly, and now these little feet, they were so little!But my fury rolled into bliss. Because, please do understand me,she was also too slight in relation to the cat, and that’s why she wasashamed, I was sure of it, she was ashamed of the cat! Oh! She wastoo slight in regard to everything, a tiny bit smaller than she
Cosmos should be, she was only ﬁt for love, nothing else, and that’s whyshe was ashamed of the cat . . . she knew that whatever pertainedto her must have the meaning of love . . . and even though shehadn’t guessed who did it, yet she was shamed by the cat, becausethe cat was her cat, and it had to do with her . . .Y et her cat was my cat, strangled by me. It was our cat.Delightful? Nauseating?Leon asked me:“Don’t you know anything? Who, how? Haven’t you noticedanything?”No, I haven’t, late last night I took a walk, I returned well aftermidnight and came in through the porch, I don’t have any ideawhether the cat was already hanging—my delight at misleadingthem grew in step with this deceitful deposition, I was no longerwith them but against them, on the other side. As if the cat hadtransferred me from one side of the medal to the other, into an-other sphere where mysteries happened, into the sphere of thehieroglyph. No, I was no longer with them. Laughter tickled me asI watched Fuks laboriously looking for signs by the wall and at-tentively listening to my lies.I knew the mystery of the cat. I was the perpetrator.“Hanging the cat! Imagine someone hanging the cat!” Roly-Poly exclaimed with fury and then stopped, as if something hadcome over her.Katasia emerged from the kitchen and walked toward usthrough the ﬂowerbeds. Her “aﬀected” little mouth drew closer tothe cat’s jaws—I sensed that she, while walking, feels that she iscarrying something akin to those jaws, and this provided me withinstant gratiﬁcation, as if my cat were settling itself more solidlyon the opposite side. The lip was drawing nearer to the cat and all
 Witold Gombrowiczmy doubts, which had been raised by her oh so innocent photo-graph, evaporated, the lip with its slippery slipaway, was drawingcloser, dislocated and despicable, a strange swinish similarity wastaking place—and a kind of dark, nocturnal shudder ran throughmy loins. At the same time I didn’t take my eyes o ﬀLena—and imagine my astonishment, my emotion, my secret tremor, ecstaticperhaps, I don’t know, when I sensed that Lena’s shame intensi ﬁed at the same time that the depravity of Katasia’s mouth rose abovethe cat. Shame has a strange, contrary nature, even while defend-ing against something it pulls that something into the most deeplypersonal and intimate domain—and so Lena, shamed by the catand by the lip with the cat, drew it all into the mysteriousness ofher private secrets. And thanks to her shame the cat became unitedwith the lip, like one gear engaging another! But my soundless cryof triumph became united with a groan, how the devil could thisfresh, naïve beauty drink in this foulness . . . and by her shameconﬁrm my fantasies! Katasia had a box in her hand—our boxwith the frog—ah, Fuks had obviously forgotten to take it as wewere leaving!“I found this in my place, in my little room, on the windowsill.”“What’s inside the box?” Leon asked.“A frog.”Leon began waving his hands, but Fuks intervened with unex-pected vigor. “Excuse me,” he said, taking the box from Katasia.“About this later. We’ll explain it. In the meantime I want to inviteyou all into the dining room. I’d like to have a word with you. Let’sleave the cat as it is, I’ll look at this again at my leisure.”Was this ass planning to play detective?We slowly made our way toward the house, myself, Mrs. Roly-Poly not saying a word, unfriendly, resentful, Leon looking crum-
Cosmos pled, a tuft of his hair sticking out. Ludwik wasn’t there, hewouldn’t be back from the oﬃce until this evening. Katasia re-turned to the kitchen.In the dining room Fuchs began: “Ladies and gentlemen, let’sbe frank. The fact is that something’s going on here.”Drozdowski, anything to forget Drozdowski, it was clear thathe had latched onto this and would push it no matter what.“Something’s brewing. Witold and I, we ﬁgured this from the timewe arrived here, but we felt awkward talking about it, there wasnothing deﬁnite, just some impressions . . . but after all, let’s befrank here.”“I actually,” Leon began. “Excuse me,” Fuks interrupted to re-mind him that we had found the hanged bird when we ﬁrst ar- rived here . . . a truly puzzling phenomenon. He related how welater detected something like an arrow on the ceiling in our room.An arrow or not an arrow, it could have been an illusion, especiallybecause last evening we had also imagined an arrow here, on theceiling, do you all remember that? . . . an arrow or maybe arake . . . in fact, we should not exclude autosuggestion, atenti!But out of sheer curiosity, mark you, ladies and gentlemen, for thesport of it, we decided to investigate.He described our discovery, the position of the stick, the crackin the wall, and he closed his eyes.“Hmm . . . granted . . . the hang-ing sparrow . . . the hanging stick . . . there’s something in it . . . Ifonly these weren’t exactly where the arrow was pointing . . . ”I suddenly felt happy at the thought of the cat hanging—likethe stick—like the sparrow—I felt happy about the symmetry!Leon got up, he wanted to go see the stick immediately, but Fuksstopped him. “Please wait. First let me tell you everything.”Laboring over the story, however, the cobweb of numerous
 Witold Gombrowiczconjectures and analogies entangled him, I saw him ﬂagging, at one point he even laughed at himself and at me, then he grew se-rious again, and with a pilgrim’s weariness he expounded on thewhiﬄetree, that the whiﬄetree was aiming at . . . “Ladies andgentlemen, what’s the harm in checking? Since we had checkedthe arrow, why not do the same with the whi ﬄetree. We just . . . for the sake of checking. Just in case. Not that we mistrust Kata-sia . . . just for the sake of checking! And, just in case, I had the frogin the box, to simulate a joke if someone caught us. I forgot it as I was leaving, that’s why Katasia found it.”“The frog,” said Roly-Poly.Fuks recounted the search, how we searched and searched invain, and nothing, nothing, but please imagine, we ﬁnally came upon a certain detail, trivial, granted, entirely third-rate, I agree,yes, but repeating itself more often than it should have . . . please,ladies and gentlemen, judge for yourselves, I’ll simply give you alist . . . And he began to recite, but without conviction and toofeebly!A needle driven into a tabletop.A pen nib driven into a lemon rind.A nail ﬁle driven into a box.A safety pin driven into a piece of cardboard.A nail driven into the wall, right above the ﬂoor. Oh, how this litany debilitated him, tired and bored he took a deep breath,wiped the corners of his ogle eyes and stopped, like a pilgrim whohas suddenly lost his faith, while Leon crossed his legs, and thisimmediately took on the character of impatience, which fright-ened Fuks, who lacked self-conﬁdence anyway, Drozdowski hadliquidated it for him. I again became furious at being involved inthis with him, I, who had that business with my family in Warsaw,
Cosmos it was all discouraging, disgusting, such rotten luck, well, itcouldn’t be helped . . .“Needles, lemon rinds . . . ” Leon grumbled. He didn’t ﬁnish, but that was enough: needles, lemon rinds, in other words hog-wash, hogwash, a pile of garbage and we were on top of it, like twogarbage men.“Wait, sir,” Fuks exclaimed,“the remarkable thing is that,” turn-ing to Roly-Poly, “when we left there you were also driving insomething! With a hammer! Into the tree trunk by the wickergate. With all your might!”He looked aside. He adjusted his tie.“I was driving in something?”“Yes you, Mrs. Wojtys.”“So what?”“What do you mean so what, all the other things were driven in,and you too were driving in something!”“I was not driving in anything, I was just pounding the tree.”Mrs. Wojtys was reaching for words from the resources of amartyr’s endless patience.“Lena, honey, explain why I was pounding the tree.”Her voice was impersonal, stony, and her gaze bore the dictum“I’ll bear it.”Lena retreated into herself—more a pretense of a movementthan a movement, she was like a snail, like certain shrubs, like any-thing that recedes or coils up when touched.She swallowed.“Lena, tell them the truth!”“Every once in while, my mother . . . It’s a sort of crisis. Nerves.It happens from time to time. Then she grabs anything . . . to re-lieve herself. She pounds. If it’s glass, she breaks it.”
 Witold GombrowiczShe was lying. No, she was not lying! This was the truth and alie at the same time. The truth, because it corresponded to reality.A lie, because her words (I knew it already) were not importantfor their truth but only because they originated from her, fromLena—like her gaze, her fragrance. Her telling was halfhearted,discredited by her allure, fearful, as if suspended in air . . . Who, ifnot a mother, could have sensed this discomfort? Roly-Poly has-tened to translate Lena’s assertions into the more matter-of-factlanguage of an old woman.“I work, gentlemen, day in, day out. Year in, year out. Frommorning ’til night. Drudgery. Y ou know me, gentlemen, I’m com-posed and tactful, well-mannered. But when my composuresnaps . . . Then I grab anything.”She reﬂected, then said with deliberation:“I grab anything . . . ”All of a sudden she couldn’t bear it any longer, she yelled, in afrenzy.“Anything!”“Honey,” Leon said, and she yelled at him: “Anything!”“Anything,” Leon said, whereupon she yelled: “Not anything!Anything!” And she became quiet.I too sat quietly.“That’s understandable,” Fuks melted into civilities. “Quitenatural . . . With so much work and trouble . . . Nerves! Y es,yes! . . . That explains it . . . but right after that there was an-other banging, it seemed to be coming from the house, from thesecond ﬂo o r ?...”“That was me,” Lena declared.“She,” Mrs. Wojtys informed us with a patience that knew nobounds, “when she hears that something is coming over me, she’ll
Cosmos either run to me and catch my arm, or she’ll make a lot of noiseherself. T o bring me to my senses.”That settled it. Lena added a few more details. That they hadjust returned with Ludwik, that when she heard her motherbanging she picked up her husband’s shoe (her husband was inthe bathroom), and she drummed on the table, then on a suit-case . . . Everything has been cleared up, last night’s riddles settledon the dry sands of explanation—it didn’t surprise me, I wasready for it, and yet it was tragic, the events we had lived throughescaped from our ﬁngers like debris, debris, everything lay at ourfeet, needles, nails, hammers, crashes . . . I looked at the table andI saw a carafe on a saucer, a crumb brush in the shape of a half-moon, Leon’s spectacles (he used them for reading) and otherthings—all sluggish as if they had given up their last breath.And indiﬀerent.The indiﬀerence of objects, already unfriendly and borderingon stern, was accompanied by the indiﬀerence of the people—asif Fuks and I were a nuisance to them. I then became conscious ofthe cat, and this brought me comfort—because there, on the wall,some of the horror lingered, the jaws were still gaping. And Ithought that, even though two of the loud noises lay helplessly onthe ground, I had one more loud noise up my sleeve, less easily ex-plainable, a truly vexatious, even a spiteful noise . . . How will shecope with my having banged at her door?I asked Lena . . . “weren’t there two salvos from upstairs? . . .One after the other. I’m sure of it, I was by the front door,” I lied,“when the second pounding began. The second noise was quitediﬀerent.”Oh, to bang on! T o bang on into her! Just as I had done duringthe night, at her door! Was I drawing the strings too tight? What
 Witold Gombrowiczwill she reply? It was as if I were standing at her door again, bang-ing on it . . . Can she guess who banged on her door? Why hadn’tshe breathed a word?“A second noise? . . . Ah, yes, after a moment I began to bangagain . . . with my ﬁst against the shutter . . . I was upset. I wasn’tsure whether mother had calmed down.”She lied.Out of embarrassment, surmising perhaps that it had beenme? . . . Well, how about Ludwik . . . clearly Ludwik was with her,he heard my banging, why didn’t he open the door? I asked:“And Ludwik? Was he with you?”“Ludwik was in the bathroom at the time.”Ah, Ludwik is in the bathroom, she is in the room alone, I beginto bang, she doesn’t open the door—perhaps she guesses that it’sme, perhaps not—in any case she knows that whoever is banging,is banging into her. She doesn’t open the door, she’s terri ﬁed. And now she’s lying that she was the one banging! Oh, what happiness,what triumph that my lie had banged into her lie, and we wereboth united in a lie, with my lie I was growing into her lie!Leon returned to the question:“Who hanged the cat?”He noted politely that it’s not worth preoccupying ourselveswith the noises—that’s been settled, anyway he can’t say anythingon the subject, his bridge game had ended at three in the morn-ing—but who hanged the cat, why was the cat hanged? . . . And heasked this with an emphasis that, aiming at no one, hung in theair: “Who hanged it? I’m asking, who?”A blind stubbornness spread over his face that was crownedwith baldness.“Who hanged the cat?” he asked in good faith, in all fairness. He
Cosmos insisted, which began to worry me. Suddenly Mrs. Wojtys, lookingstraight ahead, pronounced without so much as a quiver:“Leon.”But what if it was she? What if she had murdered the cat? Ofcourse I knew who had murdered it, I had murdered it—but withher “Leon” she turned everyone’s gaze upon herself, and Leon’spersistence found, so to speak, its proper direction and tumbledonto her. Regardless of everything, it seemed to me that shecould have, that if she had pounded with a hammer in fury, shecould have, with the same fury, done as much to the cat . . . and itwould be like her, like her short limbs and thick joints, her shortand broad torso that abounded in maternal favors—yes, shecould have—everything put together, the torso, the limbs, etc., allthat could have strangled and hanged the cat!“Ti, ri, ri!”Leon hummed.. . . and a hidden delight resounded in the little melody thatimmediately went silent . . . it sounded malicious . . . this ma-liciousness . . .Wasn’t it delightful that “kookookoo Roly-Poly” had not with-stood his questioning, and that his persistence had fallen on her,that she had turned everyone’s gaze upon herself? . . . So, so per-haps he was the one, and no one else, yes, indeed, he could havedone it, and why not . . . what about the bread pellets, his fondlingthem and playing with them, moving them with a toothpick,humming to himself, cutting into an apple peel with his ﬁnger- nail, his “thinking” and ﬁguring . . . so why couldn’t he havestrangled the cat, hanged it? I had strangled it. Y es, I had hangedit. I had hanged it, strangled it, but he could have . . . He could havehanged it and now he could bemaliciously happy that his
 Witold Gombrowiczwife is in dire straits! But if he had not hanged the cat (because Ihad hanged it), he could have, in any case, hanged the sparrow . . .and the stick!Because, for God’s sake, the sparrow and the stick haven’t ceasedto be a riddle just because I hanged the cat! They were hangingthere, at the outer limits, like two centers of darkness!Darkness! I needed it! Darkness was vital to me as an extensionof the night during which I had been banging into Lena! AndLeon too made himself part of this darkness, suggesting the pos-sibility of lascivious sybaritism, of fun that was camou ﬂaged and sealed tight and romping on the Wild Fields of this venerablehome—something that would have been less likely had he notjust now cut short his ditty for fear of betraying himself . . . His ti-ri-ri had the quality of a roguish, joyful whistling over the factthat his wife had slipped up . . . Could it also have dawned on Fuksthat the venerable daddy and husband, the retired banker loung-ing about the house, who took oﬀsolely to play bridge, could havecarried on, at the family table, under his wife’s eye, his own privategames . . . And if he played with pellets, why couldn’t he have in-sinuated arrows on ceilings! And have had other fun and games onthe side as well.A thinker! . . . He was, after all, a thinker . . . he thought andthought—and he could have thought up more than a meretriﬂe...Something rattled, shook, a din, a truck, huge, with a trailer, theroad, it passed, bushes, it disappeared, the windowpanes fellsilent, we turned our gaze from the window, but this called up anawakening of “all the rest of it,” of all that, there, beyond our circle,and I, for one, heard the barking of little dogs in the neighboringgarden, I noticed a carafe ﬁlled with water on a small table, noth-
Cosmos ing important, no, nothing, but the intrusion, the intrusion ofthat something from outside, of the whole world, somehow foiledour plans, and we began talking in a more disorderly manner, thatno stranger could have done it because of the dogs, that theywould have attacked him, that last year thieves were prowlinghere, and about other things, etc., etc., this went on for a ratherlong time, randomly, I went on catching those other sounds “fromthe depths,” as if someone were smacking, thwacking somewhere,and the sound of copper creaking from somewhere else, as if froma samovar . . . the barking again, I was tired and discouraged, thensuddenly I had the impression that something was again begin-ning to take on a more distinct shape . . .“Who did this to you? Why did he do it? Oh, my darling!”Roly-Poly embraced Lena. They hugged each other. The hugseemed unpleasant, somehow directed against me, and I regainedmy vigilance, it was the prolongation of the hug by a tri ﬂing bil- lionth (which evoked a sense of excess, of protraction and exag-geration) that actually forced me to be on my guard! What was it,and why? Roly-Poly freed Lena from her short, embracing arms.“Who did this to you?”What is she up to? Taking aim at someone? Not at Leon . . . atme then? Yes, at me and at Fuks, by hugging Lena she was coaxinginto the light of day the whole dark passion of the cat’s murder,well of course, “who did this to you?” meant “it was done to you,and if to you, then passion was the only reason, and who to sus-pect if not the recently arrived, two young men?” Oh, what bliss!The bliss of the cat becoming a love-cat! . . . look out though, thereis danger! I swayed back and forth trying to decide what to say, thiswas an impasse, a gap, a hole, nothing, and then I heard Fuksspeaking, he spoke calmly, as if not connecting it with Roly-Poly,
 Witold Gombrowiczas if pondering aloud: “First someone hanged the chicken. Thenthe sparrow. Then the stick. The same hanging over and over in avariety of ways. And it’s been going on for a long time, the spar-row pretty well stank when we found it, the ﬁrst day . . .” Quite so, Fuks was not so stupid, this was a good line of reasoning, thehanging began to prowl at large even before our arrival, so wewere above suspicion . . . unfortunately . . . what a pity!“Y ou’re right,” mumbled Leon, and I thought that, for a mo-ment, he too must have had us in his sights.Suddenly everyone began talking away. “Katasia,” Roly-Polysaid,“that’s impossible! Who would think it was Katasia! What anidea! She’s been grief-stricken, she was so fond of Davie, she walksabout totally dejected, I knew her as a child, my God, if it weren’tfor my sacriﬁces, my taking care of her! . . . ” She was talking, butshe was talking too volubly, like those silly housewives, thoseboardinghouse proprietresses, and I thought isn’t she overplayingher part, but suddenly there was the sound of water from a faucet,a car seemed to be starting somewhere . . . “Someone sneaked in,”Leon said, “but to hang a cat . . . Who would sneak in to hang acat? And the neighbors’ dogs . . . they wouldn’t let . . . ” My shoul-der suddenly hurt. I looked out the window, the bushes, thespruce, the sky, the heat, the window frame patched up with aboard of a diﬀerent kind of wood . . . Then Leon said he’d like tohave a look at the stick and those other signs . . .“Signs? Perhaps you can even see some from here.” (Fuks saidthis.)“I beg your pardon. Come again?”“Who can assure you that there are no other signs, even righthere, in this room . . . signs that we haven’t noticed yet?”“And you? Don’t you suspect anyone?” I asked Lena.
Cosmos She cowered . . . “I don’t suppose anyone wishes me ill . . . ” (Atthat very moment I realized that I did not wish her ill . . . oh, to die!No longer to exist! What a burden, what a millstone! Oh death!)Leon turned to us, complaining dolefully:“This is so . . . so . . . unpleasant, gentlemen, so disagreeable . . .So . . . malicious! If one only knew which end of the stick to grab,but why, no one knows, not from over the fence, nor from inside,so who could it be, neither from the right nor the left, what quirk-iness, I’d call the police, but what would that do, start tongueswagging, it’s laughable, they’d just laugh, one can’t even call thepolice, and yet, gentlemen . . . and yet, cat or no cat, it’s not just thecat itself, the whole thing is abnormal, crazed, an aberration orsomething, suﬃce it to say that a whole ﬁeld of thought is open-ing up, one can think, imagine whatever one likes, mistrust every-one, suspect everyone, and who can assure me that it’s not one ofus sitting right here, after all it’s madness, perversion, aberration,so there, it can happen to anyone, to me, and to my wife, and toKatasia, and to you gentlemen, and to my daughter, if it’s an aber-ration there are no safeguards, none at all, an aberration ﬁat ubi vult,ha, ha, ha, as they say, it can happen everywhere-um, withineveryone, within every person and in any shape or form, ha, ha,hum, hum! Such wickedness! It’s such a . . . swinishum, befouledthingee . . . in my old age, to have a home, a family, and not evenbe sure of the company I’m keeping, what sort of place is thiswhere I’m like a stray dog in my own home, where I can’t trustanyone, where my own house is like a lunatic asylum . . . that’swhy all my life I . . . all my work, my eﬀorts, concerns, exertions,my entire life’s battles that I can’t even count or remember, entireyears, God be merciful, years, and within them months, weeks,days, hours, minutes, seconds, impossible to count, impossible to
 Witold Gombrowiczremember, a mountain of these seconds of mine imbued withtoil . . . and now I can’t trust anyone? Why? What have I done todeserve this? One could say I’m dramatizing and that the cat is in-signiﬁcant, and yet, gentlemen, the matter is unpleasant, unpleas-ant, because who can assure me that it will end with the cat, thatafter the cat it won’t be a bigger beast, if there is a lunatic in thehouse, what can one know, of course I don’t want to exaggerate,but there’s no question of peace any more until this is cleared up,even in one’s own home one is at the mercy of . . . I say, at themercy of . . .“Be quiet!”Pained, he looked at Roly-Poly:“I’ll be quiet, I’ll be quiet,ﬁne, but I’ll think . . . T o think, that Iwill not stop!”Lena said aside through her teeth “you’d better stop,” and Ithought I noticed something new in her tone, something thatwasn’t part of her before, and yet . . . what can one know? I ask you,what can one know? A rickety cart carrying people went by on theroad, I only glimpsed their heads as they passed the last bush, dogswere barking, a shutter on the ﬂoor above, a child whining, a gen-eral rustling inside the house, universal, widespread, in unison,while on the cupboard there is a bottle, a cork . . . Would she becapable of killing a small child? She, with such a gentle gaze? But,if she were to kill, this would immediately meld with her gaze intoa perfect whole, it would turn out that the child-killer can have agentle gaze . . . What can one know? The cork. The bottle.“What are you two up to? . . . ” Leon said, getting on his highhorse.“Perhaps you can give us some advice?” Fuks respondedmeekly. “Let’s look at the arrow and the stick . . . ”
Cosmos It was hot, one of those moments in small rooms on the ﬁrst ﬂoor when it’s sultry, when one can see the dust in the air and beoverwhelmed by exhaustion, my legs hurt, the house was wideopen, and constantly there was something, somewhere, a bird ﬂew by, a humming everywhere, Fuks was saying: “ . . . here I agreewith you, director, in any case it’s good that we came to an under-standing, and if anyone should see anything new, we should im-mediately, ladies and gentlemen, share it with one another . . . ”Drozdowski. Drozdowski. All of this—digging itself out withdiﬃculty from under this sticky grease, lost in a crowd like some-one who has managed to crawl halfway out, who is already on hisknees but at any moment will fall back again, so many, so manydetails to consider . . . I remembered that I hadn’t had any break-fast . . . I had a headache. I wanted a cigarette, I put my hand in mypocket, no matches, the matches were at the other end of the table,next to Leon, to ask or not to ask,ﬁnally I showed him my ciga-rette, he nodded, extended his arm, pushed the box in my direc-tion, I reached for it.
 Witold Gombrowiczchapter 
They buried it behind the fence, by the road. Ludwiktook charge when, returning from the oﬃce, he heardthe whole story. Disgusted, he mumbled “what sav-agery,” he hugged Lena and then proceeded to burythe cat in the ditch. I loafed around . . . it was out of the questionto study for my exams, I went out on the road, came back, wan-dered about in the little garden. From a distance, cautiously, so noone would notice, I had a look at the spruce, and at the trunk thatRoly-Poly had pounded, at the door to Katasia’s room, at the placearound the corner of the house where I stood when I heard the dinfrom the second ﬂoor . . . in those places and things, in the juxta-position of those places and things, was hidden the path that hadled me to the strangling, if I could appropriately decipher thearrangement of those places and things, I might ﬁnd out the truth about my having strangled the cat. I even walked into the kitchenon some pretext to check up on Katasia’s mouth one more time.But the trouble was that there was so much of everything, thelabyrinth was expanding, lots of things, lots of places, lots of
events, isn’t it so that every pulsation of our life is composed ofbillions of triﬂes, what is one to do? That’s it, I didn’t know whatto do. I had absolutely nothing to do. I was unemployed.I even went into the empty guest room where I had ﬁrst seen Lena and her leg on the iron mesh of the bed, I returned andstopped in the hallway to recall the creaking of the ﬂoor when, that ﬁrst night, I had gone out looking for Fuks. I identi ﬁed the little arrow on the ceiling, I looked at the ashtray, and, gazingaround, I found the little piece of cork on the neck of the bottle—but my looking around was mindless, I did nothing more thanlook, among the minutiae I felt as weak as someone convalescingfrom a severe illness, whose world boils down to a small beetle orto a patch of sunlight . . . and at the same time like someone who,after time long passed, tries to re-create his unfathomable, in-scrutable history (I smiled because I remembered Leon with hisminutes, his seconds) . . . what was I looking for, what was I look-ing for? Some basic tone? A leading melody, a core round which Icould re-create, compose the story of my life. But the distraction,not only within me, intrinsic to me, but also ﬂowing in from with- out, from the diversity and overabundance, from the entangle-ment, did not allow me to concentrate on anything, everythingwas equally important and equally unimportant, I just came andwent . . . The cat. Why on earth did I strangle her cat? Lookingover the clods of dirt in the garden, those that Fuks and I had in-spected during our progress along the line indicated by the arrow(when I was marking the direction with the broom), I thoughtthat it would be easier to ﬁnd an answer if I were less puzzledabout my feelings for her. What did I feel for her?—I wondered,separating the blades of grass, the same ones as before—what did
 Witold GombrowiczI feel? Love, love—my foot, passion, yes, but what sort? It allbegan because I didn’t know, just didn’t know who she was,what she was like, she was complex, blurry, inscrutable (as I hadthought while staring at the continents, archipelagos, and nebulaeof the ceiling), she was intangible and tiresome, I could imagineher this way or that, in a hundred thousand situations, considerher from one side or another, lose her, then ﬁnd her again, turn her every which way (I wove my trend of thought as I was lookingover the terrain between the house and the kitchen, watching thelittle white trees tied to stakes with ropes), but there could be nodoubt that her emptiness was sucking me in, soaking me up, it wasshe and she alone, yes, yes, but, I wondered, as my eyes became lostin the twists and turns of the bent, damaged drainpipe, what didI want with her? T o caress? T o torture? T o humiliate? T o adore? Ordid I want something swinish, or angelic, with her? What was im-portant to me: to wallow in her, or to embrace and cuddle her? Idon’t know, don’t know, that’s just the point, that I don’t know . . .I could take her under the chin and look into her eyes, how am Isupposed to know, how . . . Or spit in her mouth. And yet sheweighed on my conscience, emerging as if from a dream, with aheavy despair that trailed like ﬂowing hair . . . And then the catseemed even more horrible . . .In my wanderings I visited the sparrow—even though it both-ered me more and more that the sparrow played a role dispropor-tionate to its signiﬁcance and, even though it could not be linkedto anything, it kept emerging, heavy and motionless in the back-ground. However (I thought, walking slowly down that burning-hot road and going deeper through the dried grasses), one couldnot deny certain concurrences, such as the cat, the sparrow, they
Cosmos were somewhat related, a cat eats sparrows after all, ha, ha, howsticky is this cobweb of connections! Why does one have to su ﬀer from the favor and disfavor of associations?This, however, was secondary; it actually seemed to me thatsomething was slowly breaking through to the foreground, some-thing more signiﬁcant, something even importunate . . . arisingfrom the fact that I not only strangled the cat but also hanged it.Granted, I hanged it because I didn’t know what to do with thecarcass, it occurred to me mechanically to hang it, after so manyadventures with the sparrow and the stick . . . I hanged it out ofanger, furious that I had let myself be drawn into this stupid ven-ture, so for the sake of revenge, also to play a trick, to have a goodlaugh and at the same time to turn the suspicion in anotherdirection—granted, yes, granted—but I had indeed hanged thecat, and this hanging (even though it was my very own, taking itsorigins from within me) became linked with the hangings of thesparrow and the stick—three hangings, no longer two hangings,that was a fact. A naked fact. Three hangings. That’s why hangingbegan to rise in this totally cloudless heat, and it wasn’t entirelysenseless to walk toward the thicket, to the sparrow, to see how ithung—this came to me who, after all, was lost, who was waiting forsomething to ﬁnally emerge, to take over. T o see how it hung? . . .I stopped at the edge where the bushes began, and I stood, onefoot in front of the other, in the grass, better not, let it be, if I gothere the hanging will gain in power, obviously, one has to be care-ful . . . who knows, indeed, it’s almost certain that if we hadn’tgone to the sparrow, it would not have become so . . . better becareful here! And I stood in one spot, knowing full well that anyhesitation would only increase the weight of my moving forward,into the bushes . . . which is what happened. I entered. Shade, it
 Witold Gombrowiczwas pleasant. A butterﬂy took wing. I’m already here—the domeof bushes, a recess, it’s darker here, it hangs there on a piece ofwire . . . here it is.Always busy with the same thing, doing the same thing—ithung just as when Fuks and I had entered—it hung and hung. Iwatched the dried-up little ball that resembled a sparrow less andless, funny, I could laugh, no, better not, but on the other hand Ididn’t quite know what to do because, after all, since I was alreadyhere it was more than just to look at it . . . I lacked some appro-priate gesture, perhaps a wave of my hand, saying something . . .no, better not, let’s not exaggerate . . . Oh, how the blotches ofsunlight spread over the black earth! And that beetle! The treetrunk, the rounded ﬁr! Since I came here to bring my hanging ofthe cat to the sparrow, it has become clear that it is not at all atriﬂe, it is a deed that I have inﬂicted upon myself, amen. Amen.Amen. The little leaves are curling at the edges from the heat.What could there be in that discarded can, who discarded it? Andthe ants, I hadn’t noticed them before. Let’s go. It’s great thatyou’ve linked your hanging of the cat with the hanging of thesparrow, now this is something totally diﬀerent! Why somethingdiﬀerent? Don’t ask. Let’s go, what’s this rag? I was back and open-ing the gate to the garden, the sun scorched me from the di ﬀuse, trembling sky. Supper. As always, Leon was jokie-jokie, meatie-pieRoly-Polieee feediedum, and yet the artiﬁciality and tension en-gendered by the cat were infecting us, and even though everyonewas making an eﬀort to be totally at ease, this naturalness actuallysmacked of the theatrical. Not that they suspected each other, no,not at all, yet they were in a net of circumstantial evidence, alreadyentangled in spying, the intangibility of it pressed on, creating akind of tangibility in the air . . . no, no one suspected anyone else,
Cosmos yet no one could vouch that the others were not suspecting him,so they treated each other politely, kindly, just in case . . . slightlyembarrassed that in spite of their eﬀorts they were not quitethemselves, so that this, the easiest thing in the world, was be-coming diﬃcult for them and forced. For this reason their totalbehavior had somehow undergone a kind of distortion, relating to the cat and to all the strange discoveries connected with it,whether they liked it or not, Roly-Poly, for example, came out ac-cusing Leon, or Lena, or both of them, that they had forgotten toremind her of something and this was, on her part, in some waycat-related, as if she had done something or other because of thecat . . . and Leon’s talkie-talk also contained within itself a slightlymorbid distortion, peeking in that direction . . . This was familiarto me, they were following in my footsteps, their gaze became la-bored, it began to avoid direct contact with another face, it fer-reted in corners, ran deep, searched around, checked, on the shelf,behind the wardrobe . . . and the familiar wallpaper, that familybackdrop, became a jungle or else it stretched into the giddy dis-tances of the archipelagos, those continents on the ceiling. Whatif . . . What if . . . Oh, at ﬁrst these were minor aberrations, tics, aninsigniﬁcant aﬀectation, still innocent, they were far removedfrom the state in which, as if in a fever, one carries out crazy cal-culations, computing the relation of squares in the ﬂoor to stripes on a rug, because what if, what if . . . And, of course, they did notavoid the subject of the cat, indeed, they talked about the cat aswell; but they talked about the cat only because not talking aboutthe cat would have been worse than talking about the cat, and soon, and so on, etc., etc., etc.Lena’s hand. On the tablecloth, as always by the plate and just
 Witold Gombrowicznext to the fork, and in the light shed by the lamp—I saw it, as Ihad recently seen the sparrow, it lay here, on the table, as the otherhung on the branch . . . the hand here, it there . . . and with a greateﬀort I tried, as if a lot depended on it, I tried to be clearly awarethat while the hand is here, the sparrow is there . . . it is there, likethe stick and like the cat . . . it is in its thicket, in this evening’s ap-proaching night, on the other side of the road, in the bushes, whilethe hand is here, on the tablecloth, under the lamp . . . I pursuedthis by way of an experiment, out of curiosity, with all my might,indeed by the sweat of my brow, I worked hard, but what of it, thesparrow was there, the hand was here, my strivings, my e ﬀorts could not go beyond this, it was all inept, no, it would not con-nect—and her hand lay quietly on the white tablecloth. Fornaught. For naught. Oh, oh! Her hand picks up the fork, it picksup—no, doesn’t pick up—it moves its ﬁngers closer, covers thefork with its ﬁngers . . . My hand, next to my fork, moves closer, itpicks up—doesn’t pick up—but instead it covers the fork with itsﬁngers. I silently lived the ecstasy of this mutual understanding,albeit false, albeit one-sided, concocted by me . . . But, there was aspoon nearby, half a centimeter from my hand and, exactly in thesame way, a spoon lay half a centimeter from her hand—should Ilean the side of my hand against the spoon? I can do it without at-tracting anyone’s attention, the distance is tiny. I’m doing it—myhand has just moved and is touching the spoon—and I see thather hand has also moved and is also touching the other spoon.All this within time that was reverberating like a gong, ﬁlled to the brim, cascade, vortex, swarm, cloud, the Milky Way, dust,sounds, events, this and that, etc., etc., etc. . . . Such a tri ﬂe on the very boundary of chance and non-chance, what can one know,
Cosmos maybe yes, maybe no, her hand has moved, maybe intentionally,or maybe half-intentionally, half-unintentionally, ﬁfty, ﬁfty.Roly- Poly removes a lid, Fuks tugs at his cuﬀ...Next morning we left early for an excursion in the mountains.This was Leon’s idea, nothing new, something he’s been chat-tering about for quite a while, saying I’ll deal you something new,I’ll let you in on a strange sweetness in those fatherland moun-tains of ours, I’ll whirr-in a real tidbit for you to chew on, nevermind the Turnias, the Ko∑cieliskas, the Sea Eye, which are, ifyou’ll pardon the expression, oldie, postcard-like slippers, lickedand crumpled, ha, ha, old-socks guano tourism, they are nothing,but from a certain mountain panorama I’ll spin you a yarn ofyarns, a ﬁstful of sights, I tell you,ﬁrst class primo,I’ll set your soul hopping for the rest of your life, a treasure and a dream,miraculum miraculosum, the one and only dream-like enchant-ment. Where did I get this idea, you’ll ask. The answer is that I ac-cidentally lost my way, how many years ago was it? . . . twenty-seven . . . in July, I remember it as if it were today, I lost my wayin Ko∑cieliska, I crawled along, came upon a vista valley pan-orama the likes of which you’ve never seen, a couple of miles o ﬀ the main road, you can get there in a horse cart, there’s even achalet, though abandoned, the bank bought it, yes, I inquiredabout it, they were supposed to submit proposals, let me tell you,what a sight! . . . A vision, I’d say, draped with nature’s garland, agrassy reverie, a ﬂowery and tree-like reverie, a brook-like bab-bling poetry, with alpine hills and dales in the spirit of darkgreenery, and yet with a lofty and singular loftiness, hey, hey, Omy God,tutti frutti,ﬁnger-licking! We could go for a day, for twodays, by horse carts, with bedding and delicious travel morsels,on my word of honor, for one’s whole life, for life, once one has
 Witold Gombrowiczset his dreaming eyes upon it, ha, ha, ha! I live on it to this day,I swore to go there once more before I died, O God, O God, yearspass, I’ll keep my vow! . . .Y et it wasn’t until after the cat that the prospect of taking freshair, of entertainment and change appealed to us to the same de-gree that the house became stiﬂing . . . and Roly-Poly, after saying“you thought and thought and ﬁnally thought up something” and“enough talk, Leon, enough,” began to view this project more fa-vorably, especially since Leon remarked that this would be a con-venient way to reciprocate socially toward Lena’s two girlfriendsfrom Zakopane. Finally then, Leon’s insistence on “emerging fromhis boar’s den” was answered by Roly-Poly’s culinary and other ac-tivities, making sure that the said social reciprocation would turnout ﬁrst class.And so, while the conﬁguration: stick—sparrow—cat—mouth—hand and so on, and so on (with all their o ﬀshoots, ramiﬁcations, tentacles), while, like I say, this conﬁguration per- sisted, a fresh, healthier trend emerged, everyone happily as-sented, in a ﬁt of good cheer Roly-Poly cautioned me and Fuks: “itwill be sweet,” because both Lena’s friends are newlyweds, there-fore no less than three cute couples “in the honey state” will betaking part in this excursion, it will be a pleasant, social diversion,so much more original than the usual excursions to places already“banalized.” Of course this too was happening in connection withthe cat. The cat was the spiritus novens,if it were not for the cat noone would have been eager to go on this excursion . . . in any casethis activity distracted us from the cat . . . brought relief . . . in thelast few days some kind of torpidity had settled in, no one felt likedoing anything, suppers, one after the other, as regular as thenightly moon, unchanging, while constellations, arrangements,
Cosmos conﬁgurations suﬀered a certain wear and tear and paled . . . I hadbegun to worry that everything would slow to a snail’s pace, like achronic illness, a chronic entanglement . . . So it was better forsomething to happen, even this excursion. Yet at the same time Iwas somewhat surprised at Leon’s zeal, he constantly returned tothat day twenty-seven years ago when, lost, he stumbled uponsuch a fantastic sight (so strike me, beat and torture me—I can’tpiece it all together—I was wearing my old shirt, take note, thecolor of coﬀee, the one in the photo, ah but which pantaloons,eh? . . . dear God, y’know, I dunno, all lost and vanished, some-thing was there somehow somewhere, and my legs, I was washingmy legs, washing where, washing in what, dear, dear God, some-thing is coming back, not coming back, sweet Jesus and Mary, oh,my tormented pate, thinking and thinking . . . ), and I found thissurprising, this concurrence seemed more and more signi ﬁcant, namely that he and I were both sinking, each in his own creations,in his own way, he in the past, I in all those tri ﬂing details. Needless to say my suspicions rose again, did he or did he nothave a hand in it . . . the sparrow . . . the stick . . . How many timeshad I told myself, nonsense! Yet there was something about him,yes, something about him, his bald and spherical, bespectacledface grimacing with pain, but also like that of a glutton, his glut-tony was obvious, and a sly gluttony at that . . . suddenly he takesoﬀfrom the table and promptly returns with a dried weed: “Thishere is from there-hum! It’s my keep-a-sakum to this day! Yesfrom there, that astonishing-marvelosum place, yet devil onlyknows . . . did I pick it in the meadow? . . . or by the roadside? . . .”He stands there, weed in hand, his head bald, while somethingis running through my head: “Weed . . . weed . . . stick? . . . ”Still nothing.
 Witold GombrowiczTwo days, three days passed. Finally, one morning at seveno’clock we were boarding our horse carts, one could imagine thatwe were indeed parting ways: in front of us stood the house, al-ready in a state of abandonment and stamped with imminentloneliness, it was to remain under Katasia’s care, she was given in-structions concerning various precautions, that she should keepan eye on everything, not leave the doors ajar—in case of emer-gency, Katasia, knock on the neighbors’ door—yet these ordersconcerned something that would soon be separate from us, leftbehind. And that’s what happened. In the listless dawn the trustyhorses set out along the sandy road, the house disappeared, thepair of dappled mares trotted, the mountain peasant sat ahead inthe driver’s seat, the cart shook and squeaked, Ludwik, Lena, andI sat on well-padded seats (Fuks was traveling with the Leons inthe ﬁrst cart), our eyes heavy from lack of sleep . . . after the housedisappeared only movement remained, bouncing in the ruts,sleepy noises of the ride and things passing by . . . but the excur-sion had not quite begun,ﬁrst we had to drop by a pensionto pick up one of the young couples. More jolting. We arrive, the youngcouple scrambles into the cart with all kinds of small packages,laughter, barely-awake kisses with Lena, conversation, though list-less, everything faint . . .We emerged onto the main road and dropped into the country-side opening before us, we are moving. The horses are trotting,slowly. A tree. It approaches, passes, vanishes. A fence and a house.A little ﬁeld planted with something. Sloping meadows androunded hills. A rack wagon. A sign on a barrel. A car passes us atfull speed. Our ride is ﬁlled with shaking, squeaking, rocking,trotting, the horses’ rumps and tails, the mountain peasant withhis whip, and above it all the early morning sky, and the sun, al-
Cosmos ready wearisome, already beginning to burn our necks. Lena wasbouncing up and down and swaying with the cart, but that wasn’timportant, actually nothing was important in the slow vanishingthat makes up a ride, something else was preoccupying me, some-thing that had no ﬂesh, it was the relation of the speed with whichcloser objects came and went, to the slower coming and going ofobjects farther away, and also in comparison to the quite distantones that almost stood still—that’s what was preoccupying me. Ithought that during a ride objects appear, only to disappear, ob-jects are unimportant, the landscape is unimportant, the onlything that is left is appearance and disappearance. A tree. A ﬁeld. Another tree. It passes.I wasn’t present. Isn’t it true (I thought), that one is almost neverpresent, or rather never fully present, and that’s because we haveonly a halfhearted, chaotic and slipshod, disgraceful and vile rela-tionship with our surroundings; and, what’s more, people whotake part in social games, on an excursion for example (I ﬁgured), are not even ten percent present. And, in our case especially, thepressing wave of objects and objects, of views and views, the vast-ness after such a recent conﬁnement, only yesterday in fact, whenwe were within the ambit of tight clods of dirt, motes, dryness,cracks, etc., etc., pustulations and glasses, bottles, yarns, corks, etc.,etc. and patterns arising out of them, etc. etc., this wave was sim-ply dissolving everything, a huge river, an inundation, a deluge,immeasurable waters. I was vanishing, next to me Lena was van-ishing. Jolting. Trotting. Scanty, sleepy little conversations withthe new couple. Nothing really, except that I’m moving away withLena from the house where Katasia stayed behind, and momentby moment we are farther away, and in a moment we’ll be evenfarther away, while there, the house is there, the wicket-gate, the
 Witold Gombrowiczpuny whitewashed trees tied to stakes, and the house is there,while we are moving farther and farther away.Y et in time our cart became animated, the new couple, he,Lukie, she, Lulu, began to come to life and soon, after the initial“oh no, Lukie, did I forget the thermos,” and “Lulu, move thatbackpack, it’s hurting me,” they totally abandoned themselves toluluing!Lulu, younger than Lena, plump and pink, with cute littledimples, little peek-a-boo ﬁngers, with her pocketbook, handker-chief, umbrella, rouge, cigarette lighter, twirled in the midst of itall and prattled hee-hee-hee, so this is the road to Ko∑cieliska, it’sjolting us, I like it, it’s been a while since I’ve had such a jolting,how long has it been, Lukie, since you’ve had such a jolting, whata small porch, look Lena, I’d have a little living room there, Lukiewould have his study by the big window, I’d get rid of thoseﬁgurines in the garden, I hate those little dwarfs, do you like thosedwarfs, Lena? Y ou didn’t forget the ﬁlm, did you, Lukie? And thebinoculars? Lukie ow-ow, how that board is cutting into my bum,oh, oh, what are you doing, what’s this mountain? And Lukie wasjust like Lulu, though stocky and with thick calves . . . yet chubby-cheeked, all of a dither, rounded at the hips, with upturned nose,patterned socks, little Tyrolean hat, a camera, little blue eyes, avanity case, plump little hands, wearing knickers. Intoxicated atbeing a pair of Lulus—he, Lukie, she, Lulu—they abandonedthemselves to luluing, played up to one another, so when Lulu saw a pretty villa and remarked that her mother is accustomed tocreature comforts, Lukie too let it drop that his mother takes thewaters abroad every year and added that his mother has a collec-tion of Chinese lampshades, upon which Lulu said that her motherhas seven ivory elephants. One couldn’t resist smirking a little at
Cosmos this twaddle, yet my smirk gave them new gusto, so they twaddledon, and their twaddle linked up with the insigni ﬁcance that was moving monotonously through the horses’ trot, a distancing move-ment, splitting the land into concentric circles, radiating faster orslower. Ludwik pulled out his watch.“Half-past nine.”The sun. Heat. Nonetheless the air was fresh.“Let’s have a bite of something.”And yet the truth is that I’m going away with Lena—this is im-portant, strange, signiﬁcant, how could I not have grasped its sig-niﬁcance until now, considering that everything was left behindthere, in the house, or in front of the house, so much, so much, be-ginning with the bed, then the tree, and even the ﬁnal touching of the spoon . . . and now here we are homeless . . . somewhereelse . . . while the house is moving away with its constellations andconﬁgurations, with the whole aﬀair, it is already “back there,” it’s“back there,” and the sparrow is “back there,” in the bushes, theblotches of sunlight on the black earth are also “back there” . . . ohhow lofty, except that my thought about this loftiness is also con-stantly receding and, by receding, growing weaker . . . under theinﬂux of landscapes. (Y et at the same time, and with total presenceof mind, as if out of the corner of my eye, I noticed a fact worthyof attention: the sparrow was receding, but its existence did notweaken, it merely became that which was receding, that’s all.)“Sandwiches, where is the thermos, give me that piece of paper,Lukie, leave me alone, where are the mugs mother gave us, becareful! Y ou’re stupid, Lukie!” “Y ou’re stupid, Lulu! Ha, ha, ha!”The other was no longer an issue; and yet, by not being an issue,it was an issue. Lena’s little face was slight, barely perceptible, butLudwik’s face was also as if he were not alive, it was annihilated by
 Witold Gombrowiczspace that stretched as far as the barrier of the mountain chainwhich, in turn, stretched on, ending at the limits remoteness in amountain of unknown name. I generally didn’t know most oftheir names, at least half the things we saw were unnamed, moun-tains, trees, weeds, vegetables, tools, settlements.We were in the highlands.What about Katasia? In the kitchen? With her lips . . . and Iglimpsed Lena’s little mouth, what’s happening with it, so far awayfrom the other connotation, how is it doing separated from . . .nothing, this was a mouth traveling in a cart on an excursion, I atea piece of turkey, the provisions Roly-Poly had prepared weretasty.Slowly new life began to evolve on the cart, as if on a distantplanet, and so Lena, and even Ludwik, let themselves be drawn bythe Lulus into luluing, and Lena exclaimed, “what are you doing,Ludwik?!” while he in turn said,“calm down, honey!” . . . I watchedon the quiet, unbelievable, so they too could be like that? So that’show they were? A strange ride, unexpected, we began our descentfrom the highlands, the distances became shorter, the swelling ofthe land crept down on either side, Lena was threatening him withher ﬁnger, he was blinking his eyes . . . a frivolous, super ﬁcial gai- ety, in any case they were capable of it . . . interesting . . . movingaway ultimately had its privileges, and in the end I too managed tocome up with a couple of wisecracks, damn it, we were on an ex-cursion after all!The mountains that had been drawing nearer for a long timesuddenly lunged from all sides, we went into a valley, here at leastblessed shade spread over the slopes that were blooming on highwith sun-drenched greenery—and silence, God knows from where,from everywhere, and coolness ﬂowing like a stream, so pleasant!
Cosmos A curve, rock faces and mountain peaks are rising, sudden chasms,exhausting screes, mellow-green domes, pinnacles, or peaks, jaggedridges and vertical surfaces falling down precipitously, bushesclinging to them, farther, boulders on high, meadows sliding in asilence that emerged inscrutable, universal, sweeping, immobile,expanding, and so overwhelming that the rattling of our cart andits insigniﬁcant rolling seemed as if something apart. The panora-mas persisted for a while, then something new emerged, pressingon, it was so naked, or entangled, or glittering, at times heroic,there were precipices, indurations, crevices, variations of hangingrocks, then, pastoral scenes, for example, in ascending, descendingrhythms composed of bushes, trees, wounds, lesions, and subsi-dences,ﬂoated in, sweet at times, at times lacey. Various things—various things—strange distances, bewildering twists and turns, atight, imprisoned space, charging or receding, twisting and turn-ing, striking up or down. Movement, immense, immobile.“Oh Lulu, dear me!”“Lukie, I’m scared . . . I’m afraid to sleep by myself!”Agglomeration, whirl and welter . . . too much, too much, toomuch, crowding, movement, heaping, crashing, pushing, a gen-eral hurly-burly, huge mastodons ﬁlling space that, in the blinkingof an eye, would break up into thousands of details, combina-tions, masses of rock, brawls, in a clumsy chaos, and suddenly allthose details would again collect into an overpowering shape! Justlike the other time, in the bushes, that time in front of the wall, inrelation to the ceiling, like in front of the pile of rubble with thewhiﬄetree, like in Katasia’s little room, like in relation to the walls,cupboards, shelves, curtains, where forms also took shape—butwhile those were triﬂes, this was a roaring storm of matter. And I had become such a reader of still life that, in spite of myself, I
 Witold Gombrowiczexamined, I searched and studied, as if indeed there were some-thing here to decipher, and I reached for the ever-new combina-tions that our tiny cart rolled out before us, rattling, from themountain womb. Y et nothing, nothing. A soaring bird appeared—high in the sky, immobile—vulture, hawk, eagle? No, it was not asparrow, and by the very reason of not being a sparrow it was afterall a non-sparrow, and being a non-sparrow, it was, in a small way,a sparrow . . .O God! How the sight of this solitary bird regaled me, soaringabove everything, supreme! The highest point, the reigning point.Really? I had actually been tired by the disorder there, in thehouse, by that jumble, by the chaos of mouths, of the hangings,the cat, the kettle, Ludwik, the stick, the drain, Leon, the pound-ing, the banging into, the hand, the hammering, the needle, Lena,the whiﬄetree, Fuks’s gaze, and so on, and so on, etc., etc., etc., asin a fog, in a horn of plenty, chaos . . . While here a bird reigned inazure—hosanna!—how on earth had this tiny, distant pointtaken control, like a cannon shot, while chaos and confusion lay atits feet? I looked at Lena. She was staring at the bird.Which bypassed us in a semicircle, leaving us again with theraging uproar of the mountains, beyond which were other moun-tains, each consisting of varied areas abounding in pebbles—howmany pebbles?—and so, that which had been “behind,” now rodeacross the front line of the advancing army, in a strange silence,explained in some measure by the immobility of universal move-ment, Lukie, wow, look at that rock! Lulu, do you see it, it’s a realnose! Look, Lukie, there’s a granddad with a pipe! Look to theleft, do you see it, he’s kicking with his high-top boots! Kickingwho, kicking where, there’s a chimney! Another turn crowding in,a balcony drifting in, then a triangle—and a tree that suddenly
Cosmos captivates you, clinging somewhere—one of many—also capti-vating, but then it dissolved and disappeared. A priest.In a cassock. He was sitting by the road, on a rock. A priest in acassock, sitting on a rock, in the mountains? I was reminded of thekettle, because the priest was like the kettle, back there. The cas-sock was also extra.We stopped.“Can we give you a ride, Father?”Chubby-cheeked and young, with a duck-like nose, his faceround like a peasant’s jutted out of his priestly collar—he loweredhis gaze. “May God repay you,” he said. Still he didn’t stir. His hairwas sticky with sweat. When Ludwik asked him if we could givehim a ride somewhere, he didn’t seem to hear, he got in the cartmumbling his thanks. Trot, rattle, riding onward.“I was hiking in the mountains . . . I went oﬀthe road a bit.” “Y ou must be tired, Father.”“Oh, yes . . . I live in Zakopane.”The hem of his cassock was soiled, his shoes weary, his eyesstrangely red—had he also spent the night in the mountains? Heexplained slowly: he had gone on a trip, lost his way . . . but whyon a trip in a cassock? Why lost in a terrain cut through by a val-ley? When did he start on his trip? Not questioning him too much,we gave him this and that out of our provisions, he ate sheepishly,then sat helpless, the cart jolted him, the sun was scorching, therewas no more shade, we were thirsty but didn’t feel like pulling outthe bottles, just riding and riding. The shadows of protrudingboulders and rocks bore down perpendicularly to the very bottomon either side, and we heard the rush of a cascade. We rode on. Upto this point I had never been interested in the fact, curious as it
 Witold Gombrowiczmay be, that for ages a certain percentage of people have been iso-lated by the cassock and assigned to God’s service—that branchof experts on God, heavenly functionaries, spiritual civil servants.Here however, in the mountains, was this guy in black, mixing inwith our travel, who did not ﬁt into the mountain chaos becausehe was something extra . . . exploding, overﬂowing . . . almost likethe kettle?This discouraged me. Interestingly, when the eagle or the hawkshot above everything, I felt invigorated—probably because (Ithought), being a bird, it related to the sparrow—but also be-cause, and perhaps particularly because, it hung there, unitingwithin itself the sparrow and the hanging, and allowing the idea ofhanging to unite the hanged cat with the hanged sparrow, yes, yes,(I saw it more and more clearly), and it even gave the idea of hang-ing a preeminence, hanging above all else, regal . . . and if I’m able(I thought) to decipher the idea, discover its main thread, tounderstand or even have just a sense of where all this is striving, atleast in this one aspect of the sparrow, of the stick and the cat, thenit will be easier for me to deal with the mouths and everythingelse that revolves around them. Because (I was trying to read thischarade) there is no doubt (and it was a painful puzzle) that I my-self am the secret of the mouth-lip union, it happened within me,I and no one else had created this union—but (attention!), byhanging the cat I had connected myself (probably? to a certain de-gree?) with the other group, that of the sparrow and the stick, I be-longed, then, to both groups—doesn’t it follow then, that theunion of Lena and Katasia can happen only through me?—andwasn’t I really the one who, by hanging the cat, had established abridge uniting everything . . . in what sense? Oh, that wasn’t clear,
Cosmos but in any case something had begun to form itself, an embryo ofa totality was being born, and here a huge bird hangs above me—hanging. Well and good. But why the devil does the priest butt in,from outside, from a diﬀerent barrel, unexpected, superﬂuous, idiotic? . . .Like the kettle, back there! And my annoyance now was no lessthan then . . . when it hurled me at the cat . . . (yes, perhaps I hadhurled myself at the cat because of the kettle, unable to bear thedrop that caused the cup to overﬂow . . . and maybe, by doing justabout anything, one will force reality to emerge, just like throwingany old thing into the bushes when something indistinct is mov-ing there) . . . yes, yes, was strangling the cat my infuriated re-sponse to the provocation of the nonsense of the kettle? . . . In anycase, be careful, shaveling, because who can guarantee that I won’tthrow something at you, that I won’t do something to you . . .something . . . He sat, not even suspecting my fury, we drove on,mountains and mountains, the horses’ trot, the heat . . . My eyescaught a little detail . . . he was moving his ﬁn g e r s...He unconsciously spread the thick ﬁngers of both his hands,then intertwined them, the worm-like working of his ﬁngers down below, between his knees, was persistent and unpleasant.Conversation.“Are you all in Ko∑cieliska for the ﬁrst time?”T o which Lulu, in the tone of a bashful schoolgirl replied: “Y es,Father, this is our honeymoon trip, we got married last month.”Lukie immediately jumped in with a cute little expression onhis face, no less bashfully delightful: “We are a couple of littlenewlyweds!”The priest cleared his throat, disconcerted. So Lulu said, like a
 Witold Gombrowiczschoolgirl squealing to the principal on her classmates: “They aretoo, Father,” she pointed to Lena and Ludwik, “they are too!”“They’ve recently been given permission to . . . !” Lukie ex-claimed.Ludwik said:“Hmmmmm!” in a deep bass-baritone, then Lena’slittle smile, the priest’s silence, oh, the Lulus, what a tone they con-trived for the beneﬁt of this high-priest! . . . who still fumblednervously with his stubby ﬁngers, he was pathetic, helpless, so likea peasant, and something told me that perhaps he had some littlebusiness on his conscience, what had he done with those stubbyﬁngers? And . . . and . . . oh . . . oh . . . those ﬁngers down below, moving . . . and my ﬁngers . . . and Lena’s . . . on the tablecloth.The fork. The spoon.Lukie, leave me alone, he’s an ordained priest, what will hethink! What’s the matter with you, Lulu, surely an ordained priestwon’t have any bad thoughts! Lukie, wow, if you knew how yourcheek is trembling! And suddenly . . . We turned o ﬀ. We cut across a valley, and by a diﬃcult and barely visible cart path we rode intothe side of the mountains! We were in a canyon that was closingin, but beyond that, a lesser, incidental, ravine opened to one side,where we trotted among new peaks and mountainsides and werenow totally cut oﬀ. . . and this too was incidental . . . new trees,grasses, rocks, the same yet totally diﬀerent, new, and constantlybeing stamped as fortuitous by our turn oﬀthe main road. Y es, yes, I thought, he may have done something, he has something onhis conscience.What? A sin. What kind of a sin? Hanging a cat. That’s a trivialmatter, killing a cat, what sin is that . . . yet this man in a cassock,descended from the confessional, from the church, from prayer,
Cosmos crawls onto a road, crawls into our cart, and of course immedi-ately there is sin crime conscience penance, tra, la, la, tra, la, la,such a ti-ri-ri . . . he crawls into the cart, and there is sin.Sin, so actually he is a colleague, a priest-colleague, he fumbleswith his stubby ﬁngers, while he has something on his con-science. Just as I have! Comradeship and brotherhood, he’s fum-bling and fumbling with those stubby ﬁngers of his, what aboutthose ﬁngers, maybe they too had strangled? Now there came anentirely new invasion of heaping, breakdown, a new, wonderfullygreen eﬀervescence, peaceful, darkly larch-like, pine-like, sleepilyazure, Lena in front of me, with her hands, and all that arrange-ment of hands—my hands, Lena’s hands, Ludwik’s hands—hadreceived an infusion in the shape of the stubby- ﬁngered priestly hands, to which I couldn’t devote suﬃcient attention because ofthe ride, the mountains, the incidental nature of things, God Al-mighty, merciful God, why can’t one focus one’s attention on any-thing, the world is a hundred million times too abundant, whatwill I do with my inattention, hey, you mountain husbandman,you’re dancing the mountain robbers’ dance, Lulu, let him be,Lukie, leave me alone, Lulu, oh dear, my leg’s asleep, we’re riding,riding, onward, well and good, one thing is clear, that bird hungtoo high, and it’s just ﬁne that the priest-colleague is fumblingdown below, we’re riding, riding, the movement is monotonous,an immense river ﬂows on,ﬂows by, the rambling, the trotting,the heat, scorching heat, we arrive.It’s two o’clock in the afternoon. Our surroundings are morespacious now, a dell of sorts, a meadow, pines and spruces, a lot ofboulders sticking out of the meadow, a house. Wooden, with aporch. In the shade, behind the house, is the cart in which theWojtyses had arrived with Fuks and yet another pair of newly-
 Witold Gombrowiczweds. They appeared in the doorway, a hubbub of voices, greet-ings, climbing down from the cart, it was a great ride, have youbeen here long, wait a minute, this bag here, we’re all set, Leon,take the bottles . . .Yet they were as if from another planet. So were we. Our stayhere was the stay “somewhere else”—and the house here wasplainly not the other house . . . the one that was back there.
Cosmos chapter 
Everything was happening at a distance. It was not theother house that had moved away from us, it was wewho had moved away from it . . . and this new house, innightmarish and forlorn deathlike silence, indi ﬀerent to our assailing noises, had no existence of its own, it existed onlyin the sense that it was not the other . . . I realized that as soon asI got oﬀthe cart.“It’s totally deserted here, not a living soul, the entire housie all to ourselves, make the most of life, mainly eating and eating,Hey brother falcons, give me vigor and brawn,* what did I tell you, this little landscape is just like such a falcon, you’ll see later, ﬁrst a little bite to eat, yum, yum, yum, march, march, allons enfants de la patrie!”“Leon, teaspoons from the bag, Lena, napkins, please, welcome,make yourselves at home, everybody have a seat, wherever it’scomfortable, you, Reverend Father, here, please.” T o which they
*From a Polish patriotic song.replied:tout de suite!Yes Madame, Mrs. major-general! “Well, sitdown! Two more chairs. What a banquet! Please, you, Mrs. Lulu,sit here . . . Give me those napkins!”They took their seats around the big table in the hall, severaldoors opened into the adjoining rooms, there was a staircase thatled to the upper ﬂoors. The doors were open, revealing roomsthat were totally bare except for a few beds and chairs, lots ofchairs. The table was laden with food, spirits were high—morewine anyone?—but the gaiety was of the kind that is created atparties when everyone is jolly just to avoid spoiling the mood forthe others, while in fact, everyone is slightly absent, like at a rail-way station, like waiting for a train—and this absence was con-necting with the destitution of this house found by chance, bare,without curtains, wardrobes, bed sheets, drawings, or shelves,with only windows, beds, and chairs. In this emptiness not onlywords but also persons reverberated loudly. Roly-Poly and Leonin particular were as if inﬂated in a vacuum and boomed withtheir persons, while their booming was accompanied by the hub-bub of their guests eating heartily, pierced through by the Lulus’giggles, and Fuks, already quite drunk, was acting like an ass, Iknew he drank to drown Drozdowski and their mutual wretched-ness, his alienation being similar to mine with my parents . . . he,the luckless, the dupe, the irritating civil servant, forced one toshut one’s eyes or to look away. Roly-Poly, the magni ﬁcent dis- penser of salads and sausages, entertaining, entreating, inviting,please, ladies and gentlemen, try this, there’s plenty, we won’tstarve, I guarantee you, and so on, and so on—busily making sureeverything was tip-top, with style, well, well, an eccentric sort ofexpedition, fun and games, no one will be able to say they haven’thad enough to eat or drink. And also Leon’s doubling and tripling
 Witold Gombrowiczhimself, the Amphitrion, the commander-in-chief, the initiator,hey, hey, all together now,before our time this forest stood,* and when the Saxon king reigns, loosen your belly’s reins,
†allons, allons! Oh, how we threw ourselves about, our expletives, the feast’shoopla, yet all of this was not fully present, it was as if undercut bya pale and crippled, rachitic halfheartedness that was weakeningus . . . it even seemed to me that at times I saw myself and theothers through binoculars, from a distance. Everything as if on themoon . . . So this excursion-escape has led to nothing, the morewe tried to detach ourselves the stronger the “other” became . . .enough, let it be, in spite of everything that was happening I beganto diﬀerentiate between this and that, I noticed a particular ec-stasy that aﬀected the Lulus at the sight of honey-couple No. , who had arrived with the Wojtyses.They called the freshly-baked hubby T olo, or our cavalry cap-tain, or our captain-dearie. Truly, he was every inch a cavalryman,tall, broad-shouldered, with a rosy, seemingly artless complexion,a little blond mustache, a doll of a cavalryman! Leon sang to him,“there stands Uhlan at his outpost,” but he stopped here, and hewas right, since the song continues “while a heavenly maidenbrings him her rose bouquet”
‡—yet his freshly-baked wiﬁe, Venie or Venomie, was of that species of resigned women who don’t as-pire to be attractive because they know it’s simply not for them.God knows why. She wasn’t ugly, though her body was a bit bor-ing, I don’t know, monotonous, yet in spite of it she had every-thing more or less “in the right place” as Fuks, nudging me withhis elbow, whispered in my ear, and yet the very thought of ca-
Cosmos *From a Polish saying.†From another Polish saying.
‡From a Polish song.ressing the back of her little neck gave you the creeps, that’s howmuch she wasn’t meant for it. Bodily egoism? Physical egocentric-ity? One sensed that her hands, legs, nose, and ears were only forherself, these were her organs, nothing more, she totally lackedthat generosity which knows how to whisper to a woman that herlittle hand is an alluring and exciting gift. Moral severity? . . . No,no, rather a strange bodily solitude . . . which made Lulu, convuls-ing with a stiﬂed giggle, whisper to Lukie “she smells OK to her-self,” yes, that was the basis of her disgusting quality, she wasslightly disgusting, like those body odors that are only bearable tothe one who emits them. But neither Lukie nor Lulu would havehad such a shocking ﬁt, such a convulsive heeheehee, if the hubby-cavalryman were not such a lusty fellow, made for kisses that tooktheir seat right under his little blond mustache, on his red lips—and everyone wondered what could have induced him to wed thisparticular woman—and the question acquired maliciousnesswhen it became known (Lulu informed me of this in a whisper)that Venomie was the daughter of a rich industrialist. Heeheehee!The scandal, however, did not end here, on the contrary, this iswhere it began in full swing, because the T oleks had, worse luck(this too was obvious at ﬁrst sight), no illusions about the eﬀect they were having, and they countered human maliciousness withnothing but the purity of their intentions and the legitimacy oftheir rights. “Don’t I have the right?” she seemed to be saying. “Ihave the right! I know he’s the beautiful one, not I . . . so am I for-bidden to love? No! Y ou can’t forbid me! Everyone has the right!So I love! I love, and my love is pure and beautiful, look, I have theright not to be ashamed of it—and I’m not ashamed!” On thesidelines, not taking part in the fun and games, she nursed thisfeeling of hers like a treasure, calm, sedate, with eyes only for her
 Witold Gombrowiczhusband, or for soaking up the green beauty of the ﬂourishing meadows through the window, and her bosom heaved from timeto time with a sigh that was almost a prayer. And, because she hadthe right to, her lips softly formed something like “T olek,” thoselips that were her organ, hers alone. Heeheehee!“Lulu, oh, oh, I’ll burst!” Then Leon, with a turkey drumstickon a fork and his head bespectacled, went on shouting that hewon’t turkey with a turkey, trot, trot, and the priest sat in the cor-ner. Fuks was looking for something, Roly-Poly brought cherries“something fruity to refresh your taste buds, if you please,” yettheir noise did not drown the otherwise total silence, solitary, god-forsaken. I was drinking red wine.T olek, our captain-dearie, was also drinking. His head high. Ac-tually, he did everything with his head high, letting it be knownthat no one has the right to doubt his love, to hell with it, as if hedidn’t have the right to fall in love with this particular woman andno other, as if this love was not as good as any other! . . . and hesurrounded his Venomie with tenderness: “honey, how goes it,aren’t you tired? . . . ” and he tried to rise to the heights of her ec-stasy, responding to love with love. Yet there was something of themartyr in this and . . . “Lukie, hold me tight, or I’ll burst!” Withthe faces of innocents the Lulus lay in wait like a pair of tigers onthe scent of blood for the T oleks’ every tenderness, and since thepoor little priest had, on the horse-cart, provided them with con-siderable delight, then how much more this little pair, or anyyoung married couple just like them, were made as if to order sothat the Lulus could lulu to their hearts’ content!Roly-Poly with her little torte, please try it, it melts in yourmouth, please—but the cat, the cat, oh, oh, the cat, ﬁrst hanged, then buried under the tree, ah, ah, it was all aimed at the cat, this
Cosmos party was to blur the cat, that’s why they were so sociable, she andLeon! But the cat was stuck in the midst of this. I ﬁnally realized: the idea of this trip was awful, they couldn’t have thought of any-thing worse, the remoteness didn’t erase anything, on the con-trary, it somehow solidiﬁed and conﬁrmed it, it even seemed thatfor years we had lived back there with the sparrow and the cat,then arrived here years later, oh, oh, I was eating the little torte. Weshould have, as a matter of fact, mounted the cart and gone back,this was exactly what we should have done . . . But if we remainhere in relation to the other . . .I was eating the little torte. I talked with Ludwik and T olek. I wasdistracted, how tiresome this abundance, constantly pouring outnew people, events, objects, if only the whole stream would stopfor once, Lena at the table, probably weary too, her mouth andeyes smiling gently at Lulu (they were both freshly married), theLena that was here was a faithful reﬂection of the other Lena, theLena who was “relating” to Lena (this “relating” was swelling, likebefore, the other time, like the pounding), there was Fuks, drown-ing Drozdowski in alcohol, yellowish-red with his swollen ogleeyes, Ludwik, next to Lena, pleasantly sociable and calm, the priestin the corner . . . Lena’s hand on the table, next to the fork, thesame hand as then, there, and I could have placed my hand on thetable . . . but I didn’t want to. And yet, in spite of it all, new threadswere beginning to form, independent of that other, a new, localdynamic was growing . . . though somehow sick and weakened . . .The functioning of the three young married couples—freshlymarried—increased the priest’s weight and meaning, while thecassock increased the couples’ married character, and this createdan especially strong matrimonial emphasis, one had the impres-sion that the whole banquet was a wedding reception, yes, wedding
 Witold Gombrowiczreigned supreme. And the priest. There was the priest, fumblingwith his ﬁngers to be sure (he held his hands under the table,pulling them out only to eat) but still a priest who, as a priest, hadto become the natural support for the T oleks against the Lulus’devilment; and one must add that the cassock also had an e ﬀect on Mrs. Roly-Poly, who was showing (since the cat) a de ﬁnite in- clination toward matters of decency—Roly-Poly eyed the Lulusless and less favorably, more and more emphatically clearing herthroat as Leon’s guﬀaws rose and were supported by Fuks’s tipsyguﬀaws and by the rest of our clowning in the void, in a vacuum,at the outer limits of remoteness, in the deadly silence of themountains’ bosom, where something began again to connect,unite, create, but one still didn’t know what to latch onto—and soI latched onto this or that, I followed a line that was suggesting it-self to me, leaving aside all the rest, huge and voracious—whilethere, in the house we had left behind, the other continued toexist, motionless.And suddenly a scene developed that connected me with thecat . . . through the priest . . .Like the ﬁrst lightning from a night’s dark clouds, it exposed usall in total clarity, in relation to that other. The scene that arosewas preceded by some remarks from Roly-Poly such as (to T olek,very politely) “Mr. T olek, please brush the sugar o ﬀVenomie’s blouse” (and to Leon, so that everyone would hear) “See, Leon, theroad wasn’t that bad, we could easily have come by car, I told youthat you should have asked Tadek for the car, I’m sure he wouldn’thave refused, he suggested it so many times, he said that it was atour disposal . . . ” (to Lulu, tartly) “Heavens, laughs and giggles,but Lulu-dearie isn’t eating her little torte, is she.” In the meantimeFuks was clearing the plates—unsure whether he wasn’t getting
Cosmos on our nerves (like on Drozdowski’s), he tried at least to buy intoour graces by gathering our plates—but suddenly he rose, pulledhis wry, tipsy,ﬁsh-like face into a yawn and said:“I’d like to have a bath.”A bath, that was one of Lukie’s favorite topics, and Lulu’s evenmore—almost as much as the topic “my mother” had been—onthe horse cart we had already learned that “I couldn’t live withouta shower,” and “I don’t know how one can bear it in the city with-out bathing twice a day,” and “my mother used to bathe in waterwith lemon juice,” and “well, my mother went to Carlsbad everyyear.” Thus, when Fuks mentioned a bath, that he’d like to take abath, Lulu immediately began to lulu, that even in the Sahara shewould wash in the last glass of water, “because water for washing ismore important than water for drinking, and you, Lukie, wouldn’tyou like a bath?” and so on . . . but while chirping she must haverealized, as I did, that the word “bath” seemed to peek unpleasantlyin a certain direction, namely toward Venomie, it was not that shewas uncleanly, no, but she had that special quality of bodily egoismwhich reminded me of Fuks’s expression on another occasion “goto your own for whatever turns you on.”* She somehow treated herbody as if it were bearable to herself alone, its owner (as is the casewith certain smells), and that was why she gave the impression ofa person who had little interest in bathing. Lulu, sni ﬃng with her little nose and noticing that something wafted from that direction,began to carry on: I feel sick if I don’t bathe, etc., while Lukie alsopitched in his own remarks, and so did Leon, and Fuks, Ludwik,and Lena, as people do at such times, to avoid being accused of in-diﬀerence toward water. While Venomie and T olek remained silent.
 Witold Gombrowicz*Further development of the onanistic theme.And under the inﬂuence of some of them talking, some keep-ing quiet, something arose, something like the likelihood of Ven-omie not bathing . . . why should she, let her go to her own self,just for herself . . .Something wafted more strongly from her direction—not ac-tually a smell but something unpleasantly personal, like her ownjuice—and Lulu, like a pointer on to a scent, and with a most in-nocent little expression on her face, was all sweetness—whileLukie was seconding, jabber, jabber. In God’s truth, Venomie re-mained, as always, silent, not taking part—except that now herclosing herself oﬀwas taking on the traits of bathing—but worsethan her silence was T olek’s silence, because T olek was, one couldsee, totally at ease with water, most likely an excellent swimmer,so why didn’t he breathe a word? In order not to desert her in hersilence?“Well, that’s like . . . ” the priest said.He ﬁdgeted, as if he were uncomfortable, and then resumed sit-ting quietly on the little chair—yet his pronouncement that noone had expected created an unusual eﬀect; it broke through theLulus’ luluing, everyone looked at him. I don’t know whethereveryone was under the same impression—that those stubbyﬁngers, the skin reddened by the collar, his bodily uncouthness, allhis troubles, splintering and festering, everything, together withthe pimple at the base of his nose, united him with Venomie. Ven-omie with the priest. The blackness of his cassock, his ﬁngers fum- bling, her eyes gazing, her trust, her right to love, her awkward-ness, her anguish, his torment, her right, his despair, everything,everything, blended together in a clear yet unclear partnership,perceptible and yet not, in their own juice in common “go to yourown for your own . . . ”
Cosmos I was eating the little torte. I stopped eating, my throat tight-ened, with my mouth full I watched . . . the . . . the . . . what wouldyou call it? Turning to within oneself, one’s own horror, one’s ownﬁlth, one’s own crimes, closing oneself oﬀ, condemned to oneself,oh, egoism! One’s very own! And like a ﬂash of lightning: thismust lead to the cat, the cat was close, close by . . . and immedi-ately the cat crawled onto me, I felt the cat. I felt the buried cat, thestrangled cat—hanged between the sparrow and the stick whichwere there, immobile and becoming overgrown with their ownexistence, strained with their own immobility, in an abandoned,forsaken place. What a devilish contrariness! The farther, thecloser! The more trivial and nonsensical, the more intrusive andpowerful! What a trap, what a hellishly malicious arrangement!What a snare!The cat, the cat strangled—hanged!
 Witold Gombrowiczchapter 
Ludwik said drowsily to Lena that it would be good totake a nap. Sure. We deserved a nap after traveling sincedaybreak. Everyone rose and began looking around forblankets.“Ti, ri, ri!”Leon’s little melody. But louder than usual and de ﬁant. Roly- Poly asked him, surprised.“What is it with you, Leon?”He sat alone at the table littered with dishes and the remnantsof the banquet, his baldness and pince-nez glistened, on his fore-head were drops of perspiration.“Berg!”“What?”“Berg!”“What berg?”“Berg!”Not a trace of kindliness. Fawn, Caesar, Bacchus, Elagabalus,
Atilla. But then Leon smiled in a friendly way from behind hispince-nez.“Niczewo,* old gal of mine, that’s two Jews talking . . . a joke . . .I’ll tell you some other time . . . ”Everything was ending, falling apart . . . The table deserted,chaotic, chairs being moved, blankets, beds in empty rooms, lan-guor, wine, etc.Around ﬁve o’clock, after my nap, I stepped out in front of thehouse.Most of our company was still sleeping—no one there. Themeadow dotted with spruces, boulders, sunny, hot, behind me thehouse ﬁlled with sleep, with ﬂies, ahead of me the meadow andfarther on the mountains, mountains all around, so mountainousand grown over with forests that they are impossibly forest-like intheir deathly silence. It’s not my place, what good is it to me, al-though I am here, I could just as well be somewhere else, it’s all thesame, I knew that beyond the mountain wall there were other, un-familiar regions, but they were no more foreign to me than thishere, a kind of indiﬀerence established itself between myself andthis landscape which could transform itself into a harshness oreven something worse. Into what? In the distinctive narcosis ofthese meadows and forests rising from the depths, unfamiliar andunenticing, isolated, there was the possibility of a sudden grip-ping, twisting, strangulation and, ha, ha, of hanging—but thispossibility was “beyond,”“beyond it.”I stood in the shade, right infront of the house, among trees. I was picking my teeth with thestem of a blade of grass. Hot, and yet the air was brisk.I turned around. Five steps away from me was Lena.
 Witold Gombrowicz*Russian for “nothing.”She was standing there. When I noticed her so suddenly sheseemed, most of all, small, child-like—and my eyes were struck byher greenish blouse, sleeveless. But this was just a moment. Iturned my head, looked the other way.“Lovely, isn’t it?”She said this, since she was just ﬁve steps away she had to saysomething. I still didn’t look at her, this non-looking was killingme—had she come to me—to me—does she want to start some-thing with me—this terriﬁed me. I didn’t look, and I had no ideawhat to do, there was nothing to do, I stood, not looking.“Have you lost your tongue? Are you in rapture?”Oh, the tone was a bit lulu-like, she had learned it fromthem . . .“Where is Mr. Leon’s panorama?”I said this to say something . . . Her laughter was quiet, gentle:“How should I know!”Again silence, but no longer so glaring,considering that everything was happening au ralenti,it was hot, evening approaching, a pebble, a little beetle, a ﬂy, the earth. As the time for my reply was running out I said, “We’ll soon ﬁnd out.” And she replied right away: “Y es, Daddy will take us there aftersupper.”Again I said nothing, I looked at the ground in front of me. Iand the ground—she to one side. I felt uncomfortable, evenbored, I would have preferred to have her leave . . . It was ﬁtting for me to say something again, but before I spoke I glanced in herdirection, ever so quickly, and in this barely perceptible moment Isee that she is not looking at me either, her gaze, like mine, di-rected elsewhere—and this mutual non-looking, mine and hers,had the air of an unpleasant debility that had its origins in the dis-tancing, we hadn’t been here long enough, I and she, she and I, we
Cosmos were as ifﬂung here from somewhere else, from there, sick, notquite here, like those unseeing apparitions in a dream, connectedto something else. I wondered if her mouth was still “in relation”to the disgusting slipaway of that lip, there, in the kitchen or in thelittle room? I had to ﬁnd out. I glanced but I couldn’t see hermouth well enough, yet I immediately saw that yes, in and ofitself, her mouth was with that other mouth, like two cities on a map, like two stars in a constellation; even more so now, at adistance.“What time are we supposed to set out?”“Probably around twelve-thirty. I don’t know.”Why did I do it to her?Spoiling everything for myself . . . Why did I, then, that ﬁrst night in the hallway . . . begin . . . (Well, in the beginning ourdeeds are skittish and capricious, like grasshoppers, but slowly, onreturning to them, they acquire a spasmodic nature, like clawsclutching, unrelenting—so what can one know?—there, then, inthe night, in the hallway when for the ﬁrst time her mouth hadunited in my mind with Katasia’s mouth, oh, a whim, a fantasy, atriﬂe, just a ﬂeeting association! And today? What can one donow, great God, what is to be done? Especially now that I hadspoiled her for myself, and to such a degree that to approach her,catch her, spit in her mouth—why did I spoil her for myself likethat? It was worse than raping a little girl, it was rape done untome, I had raped her “for myself,”this phrase appeared to meagainst the background of the priest, it had the air of sin, I realizedthat I was in a state of churchy, mortal sin, and this presented mewith the cat, and the cat emerged.)The ground . . . clods of dirt . . . a few inches away two otherclods . . . how many? . . . two, three . . . I should take a brief
 Witold Gombrowiczwalk . . . Admittedly the air . . . Another clod of dirt . . . how manyinches?“I took a nap after dinner.”She said this with the mouth that I knew (I could no longer notknow) had been spoiled by the other mouth, her mouth was . . .“I had a nap too,”I said.This was not her. She was there, at the house, in the garden withthe little whitewashed trees tied to the stakes. I wasn’t here either.But, just because of this, we were a hundred times more signi ﬁ- cant. As if we were symbols of ourselves. The earth . . . the clods ofdirt . . . the grass . . . I knew that because of the distancing,I had to take a walk, why am I standing here,because of the distancing,the importance of here and today is becoming immense. And deci-sive. And this immensity, its power, oh, let it be, let’s go! Immen-sity, what kind of a little bird is that, immensity, the sun is sinking,a little walk . . . Since I had strangled the cat—hanged it, I’ll haveto strangle her too—hang her . . . for myself.In the bushes by the road, it, the sparrow, is hanging, and so isthe stick hanging in the recess of the wall, they are hanging, butthe immobility within this immobility surpasses all boundaries ofimmobility, one boundary, second boundary, third boundary, itsurpasses the fourth,ﬁfth, a sixth pebble, seventh pebble, the littleblades of grass . . . it’s already cooler . . . I turned around, she wasno longer there, she was gone with her lascivious mouth, and shewas somewhere else with her mouth. I went away, i.e., I went awayfrom the place I had been, and I walked over the meadow, in thesun that was already less bothersome—in the silence of themountains’ bosom. Small inclines in the terrain absorbed me,mostly pebbles in the grass that made walking di ﬃcult, what a pity that she is not opposing me, but, on the other hand, how can
Cosmos someone, for whom talking serves only as a pretext for makingsounds, oppose anyone, ha, ha, ha, just like her “giving evidence”at that time, after the killing of the cat, well and good, she’s not op-posing me, so there won’t be any opposition. This meeting of ourswas so unpleasant, sideways, without looking, as if sightless—more and more blossoms in the grass, blue and yellow, clusters ofspruce, pines, the terrain was descending, and I had moved quitefar, an incomprehensible matter of otherness and distance, in thesilence butterﬂies ﬂuttering, a breeze blowing gently, earth andgrass, forests turning into peaks, a bald patch under a tree, pince-nez—Leon.He sat on the stump of a tree smoking a cigarette.“What are you doing here?”“Nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing,”hereplied and smiled blissfully.“What’s so amusing?”“What? Nothing! Exactly that: nothing! Ha, that’s a languagegame, if you please, hm . . . I’m amused by ‘nothing,’ mark you,Y our Reverence, my venerable companion and merry-maker andhorse-drawn carriage, because ‘nothing’ is exactly what we do allour lives. A fellow stands, sits, talks, writes and . . . nothing. A fel-low buys, sells, marries, doesn’t marry and—nothing. A fellowsitzum on a stumpium and—nothing. Soda pop.”He was drawling these words, with nonchalance, conde-scendingly.I said: “Y ou talk as if you’ve never worked.”“Never worked? But I have! Yes indeed! De ﬁnitely! At the bankie! The little bankie! From the dumb bankie-dear straightinto the stomach! A whale. Hm. Thirty-two years! And what?Nothing!”
 Witold GombrowiczHe pondered and blew on his hands.“It’s run through my ﬁngers!”“What has?”He replied nasally, monotonously:“Years disintegrate into months, months into days, days intohours, minutes into seconds, seconds run past. Y ou won’t catchthem. Everything runs past. Flies away. Who am I? I am a certainnumber of seconds—that have run past. The result: nothing.Nothing.”He ﬂared up and exclaimed: “It’s thievery!”He took o ﬀhis pince-nez and began to tremble, like a little old man, like one ofthose indignant little old men one sees at times standing on streetcorners, or in a trolley, or in front of a cinema, vociferating. ShouldI talk to him? Say something? But what? I was still lost, not know-ing which way to go, to the right, to the left, so many threads, con-nections, insinuations, if I wanted to enumerate all of them fromthe very beginning I would be lost, cork, saucer, the trembling of ahand, the chimney, a cloud of objects and matters undeciphered,ﬁrst one detail then another would link up, dovetail, but then otherconnections would immediately evolve, other connections—thisis what I lived by, as if I were not living, chaos, a pile of garbage, aslurry—I was putting my hand inside a sack of garbage, pullingout whatever turned up, looking to see if it would be suitable forthe construction of . . . my little home . . . that was acquiring, poorthing, fantastic shapes . . . and so on without end . . . But whatabout this Leon? I’ve been wondering for some time why he seemsto be circling in my vicinity, even seconding me, there was somesimilarity, take the fact that he was losing himself in seconds as Iwas in triﬂes, well, well, there were also other leads providing foodfor thought, those bread pellets during supper and other tri ﬂes,
Cosmos the ti-ri-ri, and again, more recently, I don’t know why, I fanta-sized that the disgusting “selfness”(“gratify yourself with your-self . . . ”), creeping toward me from the T oleks’ and from thepriest’s direction was also somehow making its way toward Leon.What harm would it do to hint at the sparrow and all the otherwonders back home? Put it to him and see what I can see, I was,after all, like a soothsayer, looking into a crystal ball, into smoke.“Y ou are anxious,”I said, “no wonder . . . After the business of these last few days. With the cat . . . triﬂes seemingly, yet alsopuzzles, it’s hard to shake them oﬀ, it’s as if they were infested withvermin . . . ”“Kitty-cat, eh? Such a triﬂing matter, who would bother withthe catsqueal of a kittycorpse? Look at that gad ﬂy, brother mine, how it’s blaring, the rascal! Only yesterday that kittycarcass wastickling my nervous system with a drilling tickle—but today?T oday, with my sky-high gazing at the mountains—oh, my daugh-ters, hey, hey, hey, my only ones?! Granted, I have in my nervoussystem a kind of celebrating tension, tumtupuli, narambuli, it’sfestive, delightfully celebratory, festively delightful, hey-ho, it’s afestivity, a festivity! A festivity! Haven’t you, sir, my dear sir, mydearie little sir, noticed anything?”“What?”He pointed his ﬁnger at a little ﬂower in his buttonhole. “Pleaseincline your gracious little nose toward me and take a whi ﬀ.” Sniﬀhim? This alarmed me more than it probably shouldh a v e...“Why?”I asked.“I’m delicately perfumed.”“Did you perfume yourself for your guests?”I sat on a tree stump, a little distance away. His bald head
 Witold Gombrowiczformed, with his pince-nez, a glassy-domelike whole. I askedwhether he knew the names of the mountains, he didn’t know, Iasked him the name of the valley, he muttered back that he knewit once but had forgotten.“What are these mountains to you? Their names. This is not amatter of names.”I was about to ask “then what is it about?”but I held back. Lethim tell me himself. Here in this remoteness “ up the summits and down to the fen, Maggie danced with the mountain men!” * And yes, when Fuks and I reached that wall, when we discovered the stick,there too it felt like being at the ends of the earth—the smells, verylikely of urine, the heat, the wall—and now, here, why ask, it hadto begin on its own . . . because, no doubt, a new arrangement isclosing in on me, and something will begin to unravel, to con-nect . . . Better be quiet. I sat as if I were not there.“Ti, ri, ri.”I was mum. I sat.“Ti, ri, ri.”Again silence, the meadow, azure, the sun already lower, shad-ows spreading.But this time with all his might, as forceful as a battle cry. Andsuddenly it fell:“Berg!”Loud and clear . . . so that I wouldn’t be able not to ask what itmeant.“What?”“Berg!”“What, berg?”
Cosmos *From a Polish folk song.“Berg!”“Ah yes, you were saying earlier that two Jews . . . a Jewish joke.”“Not a joke at all! Berg! Berging with a berg into a berg, mindyou—bemberging with a berg . . . Ti, ri, ri,”he added slyly.He ﬂuttered his hands and even his legs—as if dancing insidehimself—triumphantly. Almost inaudibly and from deep withinhe repeated mechanically, in a hollow tone: berg . . . berg. He fellsilent. He waited.“All right. I’m going for a walk . . . ”“Sit down, sir, why walk in the sun. It’s more pleasant in theshade. It’s pleasant. Such small pleasures—they are the best. Tasty.They taste well.”“I’ve noticed you like your little pleasures.”“How’s that? What? I beg your pardon?”He bubbled with a kind of internal laughter: “On my word ofhonor, true as blue, you’re thinking about those little games ofmine on the tablecloth, under the eyes of my better half? Dis-cretely, all correct, so that there would be no scandals? The mainthing is, she doesn’t know . . . ”“What?”“That it’s the berg. This berging with my bemberg with all thebembergality of this bemberg of mine!”“OK,ﬁne . . . Y ou rest, I’m going for a walk . . . ”“Where are you going in such a hurry? Hold on for one tinylittle minute, maybe I’ll tell you . . . ”“What?”“That which interests you. What you are curious about . . . ”“Y ou’re a pig. A scumbag.”Silence. Trees. Shadow. A small meadow. Silence. I said thisquietly—what harm? In the worst case he’ll feel o ﬀended and turn
 Witold Gombrowiczme out. So what, this will end, break oﬀ, I’ll move to another pen- sion,or I’ll return to Warsaw to irritate my father and bring mymother to a state of despair with my unbearable person . . . Eh, hewon’t be oﬀended . . . “Y ou’re a dirty pig,”I said, laying it on. Thelittle meadow. Silence. I was intent on just one thing: that he notgo crazy on me. Because my concern was that if he were a maniac,mente captus,in that case he would simply lose all importance,and he and all his possible deeds and all his confessions, and mystory as well, would become something founded on the indis-criminate folly of a poor idiot and—trivial. Y et by thrusting himinto swinishness . . . oh, there I could make use of him, there hecould somehow connect himself with Venomie, with the priest,with that cat of mine, with Katasia . . . there he could be useful tome as one more brick in this house of mine, laboriously built atthe outer limits.“Why are you jumping on me?”he asked casually.“I’m not.”The tranquility of nature.Anyway, if I had insulted him, it was an insult out there, in thedistance . . . almost through a telescope.“May I ask: by what right?”“Because you, sir, are a voluptuary.”“Enough! Enough! With your permission, I beg you, if youplease, if it pleases the high court, I, Leon Wojtys, an exemplary fa-ther of a family, never convicted, working myself to the bone allmy life, earning a living, day-in-day-out, except on Sundays, fromhome to the bankie, from the bankie home, now retired, butnonetheless exemplary, I rise at six ﬁfteen, go to sleep at eleventhirty (unless there is a little game of bridge with my better half’spermission), my dear sir, for thirty-seven years of conjugal life I
Cosmos haven’t been, not even once . . . hm, hm . . . to my better half, withany other. I haven’t been unfaithful. Not even once. Thirty-seven.Not even once! So there! I am a good husband, tender, tolerant,polite, cheerful, the best father, tenderly loving, pleasant to people,eager, kind, helpful, tell me, if you please sir, what is it in my lifethat entitles you to say that I, on the side, something or other, tak-ing chances, as if I’d been acting altogether illicitly, drunkenness,cabaret-life, orgy, debauchery, roguery, and whoring with varioushussies, perhaps bacchanalia by Chinese lanterns with odalisques,but you can see for yourself, I sit quietly, I chat, and—”he tri-umphantly shouted into my face, “I’m correctand tutti frutti!” Tutti frutti!What a scoundrel!“Y ou, sir, are a masturbator.”“What’s that? I beg your pardon? How am I to understand this?”“Go to your own for whatever turns you on!”“What do you mean?”I moved my face close to his face and said:“Berg!”It worked. First he rocked back and forth in surprise that thisword was coming to him from without. Surprised, even annoyed,he snapped back:“What do you know?”But then he immediately shook with inner laughter, he seemedto swell with laughter: “Ha, ha, ha, true, you’re right, berging witha berg doubly, triply, with a particular system of on-the-quiet-berg, discrete-berg at every hour of the day and night, and mosteagerly at the family dinner table, bemberging a little under theeyes of my little wiﬁe and my little daughter! Berg! Berg! Y ou, mygood sir, have a sharp eye! However, my dear sir . . . ”He looked grave, pondered, then suddenly remembered some-
 Witold Gombrowiczthing, he reached into his pocket and held out to me on his palm:a packet of sugar, two or three hard candies—a tine broken froma fork—two indecent photos—a cigarette lighter.Triﬂes! . . . Triﬂes like those clods of dirt, arrows, sticks, spar-rows! I was instantly certain that he was the one!“What’s this?”“This? Candybergs and penalbergs in the citation of the HighestTribunal. Penalbergs of the District Penal Department and candy-bergs of the Delicatessen-Caresses Department. Punishment andreward.”“Who are you punishing and who are you rewarding?”“Who?”He sat stiﬄy, his arm extended and looked at his hand “for him-self”—like the priest who was fumbling with his ﬁngers “for him- self,”like Venomie who loved “for herself”. . . and . . . just as I hadspoiled everything “for myself”. . . My anxiety that he would turnout to be a madman vanished, I began to see that we were bothworking on something—and strenuously. Y es, it was hard work,work at a distance, I wiped “for myself”my brow that was actu-ally dry.The heat, but not so very severe . . .He wet his ﬁnger with saliva and smeared it laboriously acrosshis hand, then watched his ﬁngernail thoughtfully.“Y ou’re scraping a turnip just for yourself,”* I remarked.He laughed with glee, loudly, as if in every direction, he almostdanced in his seat: “Oh, yes, oh yes, on my word of honor, I’mscraping it just for myself!”“So you hanged the sparrow?”
Cosmos *From a Polish saying.“What? Hanged what? The sparrow? No. Nonsense!”“Who then?”“How should I know?”The conversation broke oﬀ, I didn’t know if I should rekindleit, here, in this stilled landscape. I began to scrape the dried dirt o ﬀ my pants. We sat on a log like two councilmen, but it wasn’t clearwhat the council was about. I said again: “Berg . . .”but moresoftly, more calmly, and my intuition did not mislead me, helooked at me with respect, brushed something o ﬀ, mumbled: “Berg, berg, I see you are quite a bembergman!”He then asked me matter-of-factly:“Do you bemberg?”And he laughed: “My dear fellow! Perchance you, my dearie,know why I have let you in on the bemberg? What is my dear fel-low pondering in that little head of his? That little Leo Wojtys issuch a simpleton as to let anybody in on the bergum-bergum? Y oucan’t be serious! I let you in on it because . . . ?”“Because of what?”“Y ou are curiosity incarnate! But yes, I’ll tell you.”He caught me lightly by the ear—he blew into my ear.“I’ll tell you! And why shouldn’t I tell you! Because you are bergberg berging yourself into the berg with that daughter of mine,that Miss Wojtys Helena-Lena, sired by me, a Wojtys! With a berg.On the quiet. Do you think I can’t see? Y ou scamp!”“What?”“Scoundrel!”“What do you want?”“Cool on top but ready to pop! Y ou, sir, are berging my daugh-ter for yourself! With an on-the-sly-berg, with a lovey-doveyberg,and you, my dearie sir, would like to bemberg yourself right under
 Witold Gombrowiczher skirt and straight into her marriage as the lovieberg numberone! Ti-ri-ri! Ti-ri-ri!”The bark of a tree, knots, veins, so he knew, in any case heguessed . . . so this secret of mine was not a secret . . . but what didhe know? How was I to talk to him! Directly, or . . . covertly?“Berg,”I said.He looked at me with respect. A swarm of little white butter-ﬂies, something like a billowing sphere,ﬂew over the meadow anddisappeared beyond the larches by a brook (there was a brook).“Have you berged? Ha, you’re no fool! I also berg. We’ll bem-berg together! With the assurance, eh, that you, comrade, won’tbreathe a word, mum’s the word, because if you, siree, blabo to mybeloved wiﬁe for example, to my cultiﬂora, it will mean get out,out of my house, head ﬁrst, for the lust of conquering the maritalbed of this beloved daughter of mine! Catch my meaning. That’swhy, because you are regarded as a man worthy of con ﬁdence, one determines, according to the Decree b . . . b . . . number .,t o admit you to today’s celebration of my bemberging, most strictlysecret, to my berg-festivity together with the ﬂower and the per- fume. In other words: do you think, my good fellow, that I draggedyou all here merely to admire the scenery?”“Then why?”“T o celebrate.”“T o celebrate what?”“An anniversary.”“Of what?”He looked at me and said piously, with a strange solicitude: “Ofwhat? Of the greatest fun of my life. Twenty-seven years ago.”Again he looked at me, and it was the mystical gaze of a holyman, even a martyr. He added.
Cosmos “With a kitchen maid.”“With what kitchen maid?”“With the one who was here at the time. My good sir! Once inmy life I got lucky, and how! I carry this delight of mine withinmyself like the holiest sacrament. Once in my life!”He fell silent, while I surveyed the surrounding mountains,mountains and mountains, cliﬀs and cliﬀs, forest and forest, trees and trees. He wet his ﬁnger with saliva, spread it across hishand, watched it. Then he began slowly, starkly, laboriously: “Y oushould know that my early life was nothing special. We lived in a small town, in Soko¬owo, my father was the manager of the co-operative, one has to be careful, you see, people know about every-one immediately, so you see, one lives in a small town as if in frontof a window, every step, every movement, every glance and you’reon the carpet, good God, I was brought up in plain sight, besides,I admit, I was not known for courage, ha, ha, well, shy, quiet . . .I don’t know . . . of course I would seize this and that, as chancepresented itself, I did as well as I could, but what of it. Neverenough. Always in plain sight. And then, you see, well, as soon asI joined the bank I got married, and, I don’t know, a little bit, yes,but not much, this and that, we usually lived in small towns, it’slike living in front of a window, everything in full view, and, I’dsay, there was even more watching now because, in a marriage,you know, each one watches the other from morning ’til night,from night ’til morning, and you can imagine how it was undermy wife’s keen eye, then my child’s, ah, but then, in the bankthey’re watching too, at the oﬃce I devised the pleasure of deep-ening a groove in my desk with my ﬁngernail, the division chiefcomes in, what the devil are you doing with your ﬁngernail, well, too bad, but in any case and as a consequence, you understand,
 Witold GombrowiczI had to resort to small pleasures, on the side, nearly invisible, onetime, young man, when we lived in Drohobycz, a truly sumptuousactress came to town for a guest performance, a lioness no less,and I accidentally touched her little hand on the bus, so, youngman, frenzy, madness, wild excitement, do it again, but it’s out ofthe question, impossible, ’til ﬁnally, in my bitterness, I came to mysenses, thinking, why should you look for a strange hand, youhave two of your own and, would you believe it, with some train-ing one can become such an expert that one hand can feel theother, under the table for instance, no one sees it, and even if theydo, so what, one can touch oneself not only with hands, but alsowith thighs, one can touch the ear with one’s ﬁnger, because, as it turns out, you see, if your purpose is pleasure, you can ﬁnd rap- ture in your own body if you must, not a whole lot I’ll admit, buthalf a loaf is better than none, of course I’d rather make it withsome odalisque-houri . . . but if there is none . . .He rose, took a bow, and sang:
When you haven’t got what you loveWhy then you love what you’ve got.
He took a bow and sat down. “I can’t complain, I’ve gottensomething out of life, others get more, but so what, besides, whoknows, everyone talks nineteen to the dozen, brags that he’s madeit with this one, with that one, but in truth it’s nothing much, hegoes back home, sits down, takes oﬀhis shoes and goes to bedalone with himself, so why so much talk, I at least, you see, whenone concentrates on oneself and begins to render to oneself small,insigniﬁcant little pleasures, not only erotic ones, because you canamuse yourself like a pasha with bread pellets, for example, or bywiping your pince-nez, for about two years I carried on like this,
Cosmos they keep bothering me with family aﬀairs, the oﬃce, politics, while I just keep on with my pince-nez . . . and so, I tell you, whatwas I going to say, ah yes, you have no idea how one swells to anenormous size from such triﬂes, you wouldn’t believe it, a mangrows larger, when the sole of your foot itches it’s as if it werehappening in Galicia, in the southeasternmost regions, actuallyone can also get some satisfaction from the itching of the sole, itall depends on your approach, how you formulate the intention,if a corn can be painful, young man, why can’t it also provide youwith pleasure? How about poking your tongue into the nooks ofyour teeth? What was I going to say? Epicureanism, rapturism,can be twofold, because primumthere is the wild boar, the buf-falo, the lion,secundumthe little ﬂea,ﬂy, ergo on a large scale and on a small scale, but if on a small scale, one needs the abilityto microscopize, to dosify, to properly apportion and dismemberinto parts, because the eating of a candy can be divided intostages ofprimumsmelling,secundumlicking,tertiuminserting, quatrumplaying with your tongue, your saliva,quintumspitting it into your hand, looking at it,sextumbreaking it with the aidyour tooth, but let these several steps suﬃce, as you can see, onecan somehow manage without dancing parties, champagne, din-ner parties, caviar, décolletages, frufru, pantyhose, panties, busts,preening, tickling hee, hee, hee, wowow, what are you doing tothe back of my neck, sir, how dare you, heehee, hahaha, ohohoh,ooh, ooh. I sit at supper, I chat with the family, with the board-ers, and I even avail myself of a bit of Parisian café chantantqui- etly on the side. Let them catch me if they can! Ha, ha, ha, theywon’t catch me! The whole thing depends on sort of making one-self inwardly comfy with fans, with plumes, rapturously andmost enjoyably, in the mode of Sultan Selim the Magni ﬁcent.
 Witold GombrowiczWhat’s important is the artillery discharge. As well as ringing the bells.”He rose, bowed, sang:
When you haven’t got what you loveWhy then you love what you’ve got.
He bowed. He sat down.“Y ou are probably accusing me in your thoughts of being aloony-ium.”“Somewhat.”“Indeed, do accuse me, this makes it easier. I’m playing a mad-man in order to make it easier. If I didn’t make it easier, this wholething would become too diﬃcult. Do you love fun?”“I love it.”“So you see, siree, we’ve somehow come to an understanding. Asimple matter. A man . . . loves . . . what? He loves. Lovey-loves.Lovey-loves berg.”“Berg,”I responded.“What?”“Berg!”“How so?”“Berg.”“Enough! Enough! No . . . ”“Berg!”“Ha, ha, ha, ha, you’ve really bemberged me out; the point is—you’re cool on top but ready to pop! Imagine that! Y ou’re a realberg-bergman. Bergumberg! Onward! Full speed ahead! Andaway! Berg-and-away!”I stared at the ground—staring at the ground again, with itsgrasses . . . clods of dirt . . . So many billions!
Cosmos “Lick it!”“What?”“Lick it, I tell you, lickieberg . . . or spit yourself into it!”“What’s the matter with you?! What’s the matter with you?!”Iexclaimed.“Spit oneself into it with bemberg into bergum!”The Meadow. Trees. The stump. Coincidences. Chance. Don’tpanic! It’s pure chance that he’s talking about this “spitting oneselfinto”. . . but surely not into her mouth . . . Calm down! He’s nottalking about me!“T onight is the celebration.”“Of what?”“T onight is the pilgrimage.”“Y ou are a pious one,”I remarked, and he looked at me with thesame strange solicitude as before and said ardently yet humbly:“How could I not be pious, piety is ab-so-lute-ly and re-lent-less-ly demanded, even the least little pleasure cannot occur withoutpiety, oh, what am I saying, I don’t know, I sometimes get lost asif in a huge monastery, but do understand, all this is the monasticand the holy mass of my rapture, amen, amen, amen.”He rose. He took a bow. He intoned.
“Ite missa est!”
He took a bow. Sat down. “The point is,”he explained matter-of-factly, “little Leo Wojtys, in his gray life, experienced only onepleasure, I would say, that was perfect . . . and that was twenty-seven years ago with that kitchen maid, from this chalet. Twenty-seven years ago. It’s the anniversary. Well, not quite the anniver-sary, it’s a month and three days short. So,”—he bent toward me,“they think that I’ve dragged them here to admire the scenery. I
 Witold Gombrowiczbrought them here on a pilgrimage to where I and the kitchenmaid . . . twenty-seven years ago less one month and three days . . .It’s a pilgrimage. Wife, child, son-in-law, priest, Lukies, T oleks, allof them on a pilgrimage to this rapture of mine, to the bergbergum funfunberg, and I’ll berg them at midnight all the way tothe rock where I berged with her berg bergum berg and into berg!Let them participate! Pilgrimageberg raptureberg, ha, ha, theydon’t know! Y ou know.”He smiled.“And you won’t tell!”He smiled.“Do you bemberg? I too bemberg. We’ll bemberg together!”He smiled.“Go now, go sir, I must be alone to prepare myself for this holymass of mine with pious concentration, in solemn recollectionand re-creation, a solemn day, a solemn day, hey, the highest sol-emn day, leave me so that I can purify and prepare myself, by fast-ing and prayer, for the divine service of my rapture, for the holyfun of my life on that memorable day . . . go, sir! A rivederci!” The meadow, trees, mountains, the sky with the sinking sun.“And don’t think, sir, that I have a screw loose . . . I’m playing acrazy man to make it easier . . . But in truth I am a monk and abishop. What time is it?”“It’s after six.”Of course the “spitting into”was a coincidence, he couldn’thave known that Lena’s mouth was within me, he didn’t know, butnonetheless it’s interesting, the way coincidences happen moreoften than one would expect, stickiness, the way one thing sticksto another, events, phenomena, they are like those magnetizedballs, they search for one another, and when they’re close, pam . . .
Cosmos they unite . . . randomly, as often as not . . . yet, that he had dis-covered my desire for Lena, well, no wonder, he is no mean expert,but did he hang the sparrow, was the little a ﬀair with the arrow, the stick, and perhaps the whiﬄetree, were they his doing? . . .perhaps . . . yes, he’s the one . . . it’s interesting, extremely inter-esting, whether it was he, or not he, it’s all the same now, it changesnothing one way or the other, the sparrow and the stick arethere . . . with equal power, not weakened in the least, O God, isthere nothing one can do? It’s interesting, however, extremely in-teresting, this coincidental connection we share, this strange mesh-ing together, sometimes almost unequivocal, for example that hetoo . . . admires trivia, his little aﬀairs seem to dovetail with myown, in that case do we have something in common—but what?—is he somehow accompanying me, pushing me, even abductingme . . . At times I have the clear impression that I’m collaboratingwith him, as in a diﬃcult childbirth—as if we were giving birthto something—wait, wait, but, on the other hand (on the third?how many hands?) let’s not forget that “selfness,”or “go to yourown for your own self . . .”could the key to the puzzle be righthere, the key to what is churning, brewing here, oh, this “gratifyyourself with yourself”is rising from him like a wave, and fromthe priest and from the T oleks—and there is something terriblyexhausting about it—and this something is coming toward melike a forest, yes, a forest, we say a “forest,”but what does thatmean, how many tiny details, triﬂes, particles make up a small leafof a single tree, we say “forest”but this word is made of the un-known, the unfamiliar, the unencompassed. The earth. Clods ofdirt. Pebbles. On a clear day you rest among ordinary, everydaythings that have been familiar to you since childhood, grass, bushes,a dog (or a cat), a chair, but that changes when you realize that
 Witold Gombrowiczevery object is an enormous army, an inexhaustible swarm. I saton the stump as if on a suitcase, waiting for a train.“T onight is the pilgrimage to the place of this highest and onlyrapture of mine, twenty-seven years ago, less one month and fourdays.”I rose. Yet he obviously didn’t want to let me go without giv-ing me the details, and so he was rushing on. “T onight is the bem-bergum, celebrated secretly! Views! What views! Y ou are all here tocelebrate the celebration of this my Great Turn-On with thekitchen maid, the one I told you about, with the kitchen maid,from the chalet . . . ”he was shouting, I was walking away, themeadow, trees, mountains, shadows like vultures . . .I walked, the aromatic grasses, yellowing, reddening with littleblooms, the scent, the scent that was and was not like the scent atthat time there the little garden the wall Fuks and I approachingalong the line, the line of the broomstick, we are approaching, weare at the limits of remoteness after crossing the land of the littlewhite trees tied to their stakes, the wasteland, fallow, weeds andrubble . . . and the smell of urine or something, urine in the heat,the stick that was awaiting us in the sickening and swelteringstench to combine later, not right away, later, with the whi ﬄetree, with the whiﬄetree, among the pieces of junk in the shed warmedby straps of leather, garbage, the door half-open, and the whi ﬄe- tree that pushed us toward Katasia’s little room and toward thekitchen, the key, window, ivy, where the various poundings led usto Roly-Poly pounding the tree stump, Lena pounding the table,and this pushed me toward the spruce, branches, the jabbing,boughs, I crawl up, and there is the kettle, kettle, kettle, and thekettle threw me onto the cat . . . the cat, the cat! I and the cat, Iwith the cat, then, there, brr, swinish business, I’ll throw it o ﬀ... I thought about it softly, sleepily, the meadow was lulling me,
Cosmos I walked slowly, I looked under my feet, I saw the little ﬂowers when suddenly, walking on this level ground, I fell into a trap.It was a trap made of nothing, it was stupid . . . Two smallstones appeared in front of me, one to the right, one to the left,and slightly farther to the left, a coﬀee-colored patch of soil stoodout where ants had pushed up a mound of loose dirt, farther onto the left there was a big root, black, rotten—everything in a line,concealed in the sun, burrowed in the glare, hidden in the light—I was about to walk between the stones, but at the last moment Iveered slightly to walk between the stone and the loosened dirt,the deviation was minimal, just a bit, a bit, I could have gone ei-ther way . . . and yet the tiny deviation was unjusti ﬁed and this, I think, disconcerted me . . . so I mechanically veered again, to walkwhere I had ﬁrst wanted to, between the stones, but then I en-countered an impediment, it was so slight and originated from thefact that after veering twice, my intention to walk between the twostones had already acquired the character of a decision, a smallone of course, but a decision nonetheless. This was unjusti ﬁed, be- cause the perfect indiﬀerence of those things in the grass did notentitle me to make a decision, what’s the diﬀerence whether I go this way or that way, the valley, put to sleep by the forests, numb,was after all like ﬁsh dying or the buzzing of a ﬂy, dazed, em- balmed. Tranquility. Engrossment, reverie, enraptured listening. Itherefore decide to cross between the stones . . . yet the decisionbecame, since the couple of seconds that had just passed, more ofa decision, yet how is one to decide when it all comes to the samething . . . so I hold myself back again. And, infuriated, I move myleg forward again to cross as I had wanted to, between the stoneand the loosened mound of dirt, but I realize that if I walk be-tween the stone and the mound after starting three times, it will
 Witold Gombrowiczno longer be a simple crossing but something more serious . . . soI choose the way between the root and the mound . . . yet I be-come aware that this would be as if I had been frightened, so Iagain want to cross between the stone and the mound of dirt, but,to hell with it, what’s happening, what is this, I surely won’t keepstanding here on this level ground, what is this, am I ﬁghting demons, O living God! . . . What is this? What is this? A sun-warmed, sweet sleep wreathed the herbs, the ﬂowers, the moun- tains, not a single blade budged. I did not move. I stood. But mystanding was becoming increasingly irresponsible, even insane, Ihad no right to stand, this is IMPOSSIBLE, I HA VE TO GO . . . yetI stood. And then, in this immobility, my immobility becameidentiﬁed with the immobility of the bird, there, in the bushes,with the immobility of the arrangement back there, which wasmotionlessly made motionless by the bird—stick—cat, with thatlifeless, unceasing arrangement, where immobility was mounting,just as I was mounting here, on the meadow, in my growing im-mobility, unable to move . . . Then I moved. Suddenly I knockedoﬀeverything inside me, all that inability, and I smoothly crossed,not even realizing which way, because it had no signi ﬁcance, and I thought about something else, that here the sun sets early, be-cause of the mountains. Actually the sun was already low. I walkedacross the meadow toward the house, whistling, I lit a cigarette,and all that remained, like some unsettled sediment, was a pale re-membrance of this aﬀair. Here was the house. No one. Windows,doors, wide open, deserted, I lay down in our room, rested, whenI came down again Roly-Poly was puttering in the alcove.“Where is everybody?”I asked.“Out for a walk. Would you like some mulled wine?”She poured some for me, silence ensued—sad, or weary, or re-
Cosmos signed—neither of us concealed the fact that we either don’t wantto, or can’t, talk. I slowly sipped the mulled wine, she restedagainst the windowsill, looked through the window, gazed likesomeone who had come to a stop after a long march. “Mr. Witol,”she said, dropping the “d”at the end of my name, which befell herat times of anxiety, “have you ever seen anything like that hussy?Not even to leave a clergyman alone! What do they think, that I’mthe madam in a brothel?!”she exclaimed, in a frenzy.“I won’t haveit! I’ll teach them how to behave when they’re my guests! And thatdandy in knickers is even worse, the world is a horror-show, Mr.Witol, if she would just ﬂirt on her own, but no, they go on themake together, has anyone seen a husband and wife put the makeon another man, incredible, he’s actually pushing her onto his lap,it’s outrageous for a husband to be pushing his own wife onto an-other man’s lap, and during their honeymoon at that, I can’t get itthrough my head that my daughter has such girlfriends, no disci-pline, no education, and everything out of spite toward Venomie,they’re determined to spoil her honeymoon, Mr. Witol, I’ve seen alot, but I’ve never seen anything like it, I won’t tolerate such whor-ing about.”She asked:“Have you seen Leon?”“Y es, I met up with him a little while ago, he was sitting on astump . . . ”I was slowly ﬁnishing the wine, and I wanted to say somethingmore, but neither she nor I was up to it, a debility, why talk, indeedwe were . . . too far . . . over hills, over dales . . . we were . . . wewere somewhere else . . .And this feeling too was touched by a lack or absence, as if un-felt . . . I put my glass aside, I said something or other, walked away.
 Witold GombrowiczAgain I walked across the meadow, but this time in the oppositedirection—I was looking for them. My hands in my pockets, headdown, pondering deeply but without a single thought—as ifsomeone had taken them away. The dale-vale with its plumes oftrees, with its mantle of forests, with humps of mountains, wasreaching me mostly from behind, like a rumble, like the roar of adistant cascade, like an event from the Old T estament, or the lightof a star. Ahead of me innumerable grasses. I raised my head—lulu-like giggles reached my ears—the company spilled out frombehind the trees, eh Lukie, we are thick as thieves, Lulu, let go orI’ll poke you, blouses, scarves, hankies, knickers, a disorderlybunch, walking, and when they saw me they began waving, I toowas waving.“Where have you been? Did you get lost or something? We wentall the way to the hill . . . ”I joined them and walked with themstraight into the sun, which, however, was no longer there—it leftbehind one great nothing, a kind of sunny vacuum marked by in-tensiﬁed glare gleaming from behind a mountain as if from a hid-den spring—blazing the purple sky, inwardly radiant, but not giv-ing itself to the earth. I looked around, everything here below hadchanged, though it was still light—but a germ of indi ﬀerence ap- peared, a crowding and abandoning, something like turning thekey in a lock, and the mountains, hills, trees, stones were solelyunto themselves and signifying their end. Meanwhile the cheer-fulness of our little group was cacophonous . . . a sound like thatof a cracked windowpane, no one walked with anyone else, every-one separately, the Lulus to one side, she went ﬁrst, he behind her, with their little faces, yet a little stinger protruded from their cutelittle faces . . . The hub consisted of Lena with Ludwik and Fuks, abit farther was T olek with Venomie, behind them the priest—all
Cosmos scattered. I thought there were too many of them. What’s to bedone with them all, I thought anxiously?. . . and Fuks surprised me, jumping up and down, delighted,shouting: “Mrs. Lena, please come to my rescue!”While Lulu:“Lena, stop helping him, he’s not on a honeymoon!”And Fuks:“I’m always on a honeymoon, it’s always honeymoon month forme!”Lukie: “Why is he talking about his monthlies, my ears areturning red!”Lena, laughing just a little . . .Oh, the honey . . . the sticky honeymoon honey of the threecouples . . . changing on Venomie’s part into her own “home-made”honey, or “uniquely her own,”like certain scents, becauseindeed “when she smells herself it doesn’t bother her,”and shedoesn’t bathe at all, why should she, and even if she did bathe, itwould be in all seriousness, for herself, for the sake of hygiene, notfor anyone else. The Lulus were attacking Fuks, but of course theyhad Venomie in mind, he was just a billiard cushion . . . he knewit, but, thrilled that someone was ﬁnally pelting him with littlejokes, he almost danced in carroty ecstasy, he, Drozdowski’squarry, was now fawning up to them in his wretched joy. While hedanced to one side, an innate, disgusting silence kneaded itself onthe T oleks’ side. At my feet the grass—the grass—consisting ofstalks and blades whose individual positions—twists, slants,bends, desolations, crunches, desiccations—loomed before me,ﬂashing, escaping, absorbed as they were by the totality of thegrass that breathlessly stretched all the way to the mountains, butalready under lock and key, dejected, condemned to itself . . .We walked slowly. Fuks’s laughter was more idiotic than theLulus’ giggles! His idiocy, the unexpected crescendo of his idiocypuzzled me, but the honey puzzled me even more. Honey was on
 Witold Gombrowiczthe rise. It began with the “honeymoon.”But now “honey”(thanksto Venomie) was becoming more and more “self-gratifying”. . .more disgusting . . . T o which the priest also contributed . . . withhis ﬁngers fumbling . . .This love-honey, albeit somewhat disgusting, it too had someconnection with me. Connections, indeed. Stop connecting—associating—.Our steps, unhurried, trudging along, led us to an idyllic littlestream. Fuks ran up to it, spotted the best place to cross andshouted “this way.”The absence of light penetrated farther andfarther into the light that was framed by the forests on the moun-tain slopes. Lulu called out: “Lukie, have pity on my little shoes,carry me piggy-back, carry me over! Oh oh!”T o which Lukie insolently replied:“T olek, sir, you carry her over!”Since T olek merely coughed, Lukie wiggled his little hips andadded with a schoolgirl’s cherubic solemnity: “Upon my word, dome a favor, I’m exhausted, I’m dead on my feet!”The situation developed as follows: Lulu exclaimed to Lukie:“you’re mean!”She ran up to T olek, almost dancing, “Mr. T olek,poor me, my husband has deserted me, have pity on my littleshoes!”And she put out her little leg. Lukie: “On my word, Mr.T olek, one, two, three, what will be will be!”Lulu: “One, two,three!”And she went on pleading to be in his arms. Lukie: “On-ward, what will be will be. One, two, three!”I didn’t watch this too closely, absorbed as I was by the sur-roundings, by what surrounded and entwined us, at least by theweight of the mountains that from a distance enveloped andclasped us almost sternly, having themselves turned grave with theforests’ reeling and caving in (though high above us there wasbrightness—yet set apart). In spite of it, I was able to see that the
Cosmos Lukies are dancing a war dance, the cavalryman does nothing,Fuks is in seventh heaven, Ludwik nothing, the priest stands still,Lena . . . why did I spoil her for myself at that time, that ﬁrst night, in the hallway, with Katasia’s lip, and why, instead of forgetting itthe next day, did I return to it,ﬁxing it in my memory? . . . I wascurious about one thing, one thing alone interested me, whetherthe association was merely a whim on my part, or was there reallysome connection between her mouth and the lip that I subcon-sciously sensed—but what sort? What sort?An imperious whim? An act of capricious license? No. I did notfeel guilty. It was happening to me, but it wasn’t my doing . . . Notat all, why would I have made her more disgusting for myself,when, without her, my life could no longer be harmonious, fresh,alive, only dead, rotten, unnatural, made loathsome without heras she stood here with her charms that I’d rather not be watching.No, it’s not that I couldn’t love her because of the swinish associ-ation with Katasia, that’s not the point, it was even worse, I didn’twant to love her, I didn’t feel like it, and I didn’t feel like it becauseit was as if I had a rash on my body and if, having a rash, I were toglimpse the most wonderful Venus, I also wouldn’t feel like it. AndI wouldn’t even look at her. I didn’t feel well, so I didn’t feel likeit . . . Wait a minute . . . wait a minute . . . so was I the disgustingone, not she? So I was the one who perpetrated the disgust, it wasmy doing. I won’t ﬁnd out. I’ll never guess . . . But wait, wait, “lifther up,”Lukie’s calves in patterned socks, “lift her, Mr. T olek, ingood fellowship, you are on a honeymoon too!”. . .And Venomie’s voice, deep, from the fullness of her breast,trusting, noble!“T olek, please, carry the lady over!”I looked. T olek was already placing Lulu on the grass on the
 Witold Gombrowiczother bank of the little stream, end of the a ﬀair, we’re walking again, walking slowly on the grass, honey, why honey, honey andthe priest’s ﬁngers, I walked, as one walks in the night, through aforest where rustles and shadows and shapes, dispersing, mysteri-ous, yet also merging painfully, press hard and encircle at the veryedge of a leap and an assault . . . and Leon, what about Leon withhis bemberging into the berg? How long will this lurk and circlearound us? Where will the beast spring from? On this meadow,surrounded by mountains moving mutely into forsaking and de-serting, heaping large deposits of invisibility, clusters of nonexis-tence, citadels of blindness and muteness, on the meadow a houseappeared from behind the trees, it was not home and it existedonly because it was not . . . it was not the other one, there, with thesystem of conﬁgurations that contained within itself the hangedbird—the hanging stick—the strangled-hanged-buried cat, whereeverything was under the supervision and care of Katasia’s “af-fected”mouth that happened perhaps to be in the kitchen, per-haps in the little garden, perhaps on the porch.The emergence of the other through this house was importu-nate—and it was also sick, completely and terribly sick—but notonly sick, it was also predatory—and I thought, it can’t be helped,let it be, this constellation, this form, this con ﬁguration and sys- tem cannot be overcome, one can neither break away nor workone’s way out of it, it’s all too much. It is. At this point I simplywalked across the meadow, and Ludwik asked me for a razorblade—of course, you’re welcome to one!—and (I thought), it isinsurmountable because any defense against it, any escape, en-tangles one all the more, just as if one were to fall into one of thosetraps where every movement ensnares you further . . . and, whoknows, perhaps all this assailed me simply because I was defend-
Cosmos ing myself against it, yes, who knows, perhaps I became overlyfrightened when Katasia’s lip attached itself in my mind to Lena,and this was the cause of the paroxysm, that ﬁrst paroxysm that had seized me, and which was the beginning of it all . . . I won-dered if my defense preceded the assault? . . . I wasn’t sure . . . Inany case it was too late now, a polyp had formed along my perime-ter, a falsity had arisen between us, and the more I tried to anni-hilate the polyp the more it asserted itself.The house ahead of us looked bitten by dusk, to its very core,weakened . . . and the valley was like a false chalice, a poisonousbouquet,ﬁlled with powerlessness, the sky was disappearing, cur-tains were being drawn, closing, resistance was rising, objects wererefusing to join in, they were crawling into their burrows, disap-pearance, disintegration,ﬁnality—even though there was still somelight—but one was aﬀected by the malicious depravity of visionitself. I smiled because, I thought, darkness can be convenient,while not seeing one can approach, come closer, touch, enfold,embrace, and love to the point of madness, but I didn’t feel like it,I didn’t feel like doing anything, I had eczema, I was sick, nothing,nothing, just spit, spit into her mouth and nothing.I did not feel like it.“Look!”I heard the pig talking to her Dearest, her One-and-Only, quietly yet ardently (even though I didn’t look at them I wassure it had to do with the shades of purple on the horizon).“Look,”she said sincerely and sublimely with that mouth organ ofhers, and right away I heard in a deep baritone, a sincere “I see.”So what about the priest? What about this priest with his paws?!What’s happening in that quarter?Near the house Fuks and Lukie challenged each other to a raceto the front door.
 Witold GombrowiczWe went in. Roly-Poly was in the kitchen. Leon leapt out of thenext room, holding a towel.“Ready, get set, mangium,* scrub me till I shine ﬁddle-dee-dee, hey mangium yum yum, no time to pee, let’s eat, hey ho, heybrother mountain men, give me a tart, gulp, gulp, old fart, O God,ﬁll us up!”Ludwik asked once more for the razor blade—and then Leonnudged me, would I loan him my watch, he didn’t trust his. I gaveit to him and asked why he was so keen on accuracy, and he whis-pered back, it must be to the minute! Ludwik returned a momentlater and wanted me to also give him a piece of string, but I didn’thave any. I thought: a watch, a razor blade, a piece of string, oneperson after another asking for something, what is this, was theresomething brewing from that direction? . . . How many themescould be taking shape at the same time as my own, how manymeanings maturing independently of mine—barely emerging,larval, or deformed, or disguised? And, for instance, what’s withthe priest?The table was already partially set, the dusk crawling out of thehouse had deepened, it was night on the stairs, and yet up in ourlittle room, where Fuks was combing his hair in front of a handmirror propped against the window frame, there was still somelight—nonetheless, the blackness of the forest on the mountainslopes, a couple of miles away, was crawling through the window,like a thief. The trees by the house rustled and a low breeze rose.“Well, it’s just too much, oh brother!”Fuks was meanwhile goingon. “Their minds are made up, no doubt about it, you saw it, you
Cosmos *Gombrowicz derived the word from the French mangerand added, as in many other words, the Latin um.have no idea what was happening during our walk, scandalous, butyou could bust your gut laughing, whenever they set their sightson somebody, God have mercy, still, I must admit I’m not sur-prised . . . the worst of it is, that Venomie is so . . . so moved . . .please hold the mirror . . . actually I’m not surprised at Lulu’s be-havior, the way Venomie treated herself to such a strapping fellowin exchange for her father’s money is a bit annoying, and on topof that for her to be going after someone else . . . It’s a little em-barrassing for Lena, they are her guests after all, they are both hergirlfriends, besides, she doesn’t know how to cope with it, she’stoo quiet, and Ludwik is a total zero, a strange guy, I’d say the typeto just go about his job, a neatly dressed functionary, how did hecome by someone like Lena, that’s strange too, well, people chooseeach other by accident, that’s the devil of it, three little honey-moon couples, just let it go, can’t stop nastiness from developing,on the other hand, one must admit that too much too soon isn’thealthy, I’m not surprised that Lulu was in the mood for re-venge . . . She caught Venomie with Lukie, you know . . . ”“What do you mean, caught her?”“I saw it with my own eyes. During breakfast. I bent down to pickup some matches, and I saw. He had his hand on his knee, whileVenomie’s hand was right next to it, an inch away, in a positionthat wasn’t quite natural. The rest you can add up for yourself.”“Y ou imagined it.”“It’s a fact! I have a nose for such things. Lulu must have guessedit too . . . I could tell by the expression on her face . . . So now, sheand Lukie are both furious at her . . . ”I didn’t want to argue, it was too much for me, how could it be,and yet why not, could Venomie be like that, why couldn’t Ven-omie be like that, oh, surely if push came to shove a thousand rea-
 Witold Gombrowiczsons could be found to account for her being exactly like that . . .yet why couldn’t Fuks be mistaken, he must have imagined it . . .perhaps he was fabricating it for reasons unknown to me . . . I wassick, I was sick, I was sick. And I was afraid that hands were res-onating and exerting their pressure, fear made my own hand con-tract. So many dangers! Meanwhile he chattered on, he was chang-ing his shirt, sticking out his carroty head, he gabbed in his carrotyway, the sky was sinking into nothing, and downstairs Leon “wi ﬁe feedie daddie, dee, dee!”I asked sharply.“And Drozdowski?”He became morose.“Hell! Y ou’re reminding me, you bastard! As soon as I realizethat in a few more days I’ll have that wretch Drozda in front of me,for eight hours, eight hours with that duﬀer, that man makes mepuke, I don’t understand his talent for irritating me . . . if youcould only see how he sticks out his leg . . . Puke! But what of it,carpe diem,it’s a righty riot, so snappy to it, as Leonum says, what-ever fun there is, it’s mine, am I right or wrong?”From downstairs Roly-Poly’s voice “please come to the table,have a snack”—a wooden voice, even stony. The wall by the win-dow that I had in front of me was, like all walls, quite varied . . .little veins and a round red dot, two scratches, a ﬂake, little threads disappearing, not much, yet it was there, accumulatedover the years and, sinking into this net, I asked Fuks aboutKatasia, I’m wondering what Katasia is up to and whether any-thing new has happened, what do you think? I listened intently tomy own question . . .“Why should anything have happened there! Do you want toknow what I think? In my opinion, nothing at all would have hap-pened if we weren’t so bored during our holiday at the Wojtyses.
Cosmos The eyes of boredom, old buddy, are bigger than those of fear!When you’re bored, God only knows what you might imagine!Let’s go!”. . . It was almost black downstairs, but mostly cramped,the alcove was awkward, and on top of that, the table had to be in the corner because there were two benches recessed into thewalls, some of the company were already getting settled there—giggling, of course, “it’s dark and cramped, just right for littlehoneymoon couples,”suddenly Roly-Poly brought two kerosenelamps, creating something like a sediment of light. After a mo-ment, when one was placed on a shelf and the other on the cup-board, the light improved, and as we sat around the table theslanting rays transformed our corporeality into gigantic beings,making it all fantastic, trembling clouds of enormous shadowsbrushed the wall, the radiance brought sharply to the surface seg-ments of faces and torsos, all else vanished, the crowding andcramping intensiﬁed, it was a thicket, yes, it was thick and be-coming thicker, and amidst hands, sleeve, necks expanding andbecoming more powerful, everyone was reaching for the meat,vodka was being poured, and there loomed the possibility of aphantasmagoria with hippopotami. With mastodons. The lampsalso brought out the thickening of the darkness outside, and itswildness. I sat next to Lulu, Lena was sitting between Venomie andFuks, and farther away, on the other side, in a fantastic spectacle,heads were uniting, a branching of hands stretching to the plattermerged on the wall. There was no lack of appetite, they helpedthemselves to ham, veal, roast beef, the mustard was circulating. Iwas hungry too, spit into the mouth though, spitting got in theway of my eating. And the honey. I was poisoned, along with myappetite. Venomie ecstatically allowed T olek to serve her varioussalads, and I wracked my brains whether it was possible that she
 Witold Gombrowiczcould be not only the way I thought of her but also as Fuks hadsaid, this was not impossible, she could have been like that, withthe organ of her mouth and with her ecstasy, because everythingis always possible, and in the billions of possible causes there willalways be justiﬁcation for every combination, and the priest, whatabout the priest who said nothing, eating something or other as ifit were merely noodles, or gruel, he ate listlessly, and the mannerof feeding himself was like that of a poor peasant, meager and insome way crushed underfoot, like a bug (but I didn’t know, Ididn’t know anything that well, I was looking at the ceiling), sowhat about the priest, was there something forming in that quar-ter? I was eating well enough, though with disgust, but it was Iwho was disgusting, not the veal, what a pity that by spoiling Ispoiled things, I spoiled everything for myself . . . yet I wasn’t tooworried, what could have worried me, being so distant? Leon alsoate as if at a distance. He sat in a corner where the benches joined,his pince-nez protruded and glistened like two drops below thedome of his skull, his countenance hung over his plate, he cut thebread and ham into small pieces, and his procedure of impalingthem on his fork began, lifting them to his mouth, shoving themin, savoring, chewing, and swallowing, it took a long time for himto be done with each morsel. Strange, he was silent, and that’sprobably why hardly anyone else at the table said anything, theyjust tucked in. He gratiﬁed himself by eating. He masturbated byeating, which was rather tiresome, especially since Venomie’s sati-ating herself by the side of her cavalryman, though not similar,was similar (“gratify yourself with yourself”), and besides her eat-ing there was also the priest’s eating, chewing like a peasant, be-fouled by something. And “eating”was connected to “mouth,”andin spite of it all,“mouth”began anew, spit into the mouth, spit into
Cosmos the mouth . . . I was eating, even with appetite, but my appetite wasa rather awful evidence that I had become at home with that spit-ting of mine, yet that terror did not terrify me, it was remote . . .I was eating the cold veal and the salad. Vodka.“The eleventh.”“The eleventh is on Tuesday.”“ . . . silver-plated ﬁxtures underneath, not bad . . . ”“ . . . to the Red Cross, but they said . . . ”Chitchat. Miscellaneous words, here, there, “or little nuts, thesalty ones,”“why not, have some and be done with it,”“the lawmoves on, relentlessly,”“whose?”“last night”. . . the thicket grew,and, I thought, the thicket is rolling on unceasingly, I was in arolling swarm where something constantly surfaced, who couldremember, grasp, so much, so much, from the very beginning, theiron bed, but the bed on which she lay with her legs was somehowmissing, lost along the way, then farther on the cork, for instance,the little piece of cork in the dining room, the cork had also some-how disappeared, then the pounding, or Roly-Poly’s countess forinstance, the chicken that Ludwik had mentioned, the ashtraywith the mesh, or even the stairs, yes, the stairs, the little win-dow, the chimney and the drainpipe, my God, the odds and endsunder the whiﬄetree, and next to that, great God, the fork, theknife and the hand, and the hands, her hand, my hand, or ti-ri-ri,great God, Fuks, all that with Fuks, the sun for instance, throughthe hole in the window shade, or our moving, for instance, alongthe line of the broomstick, the little stakes, or our moving alongthe road in the sweltering heat, O God, O God, all the tiredness,the smells,ﬁnishing one’s tea . . . and how Roly-Poly was saying“my daughter,”O God, penetrating behind that root, I don’tknow, the soap in Katasia’s little room, a piece of soap, or the
 Witold Gombrowiczkettle, her gaze withdrawing, mimosa-like, the wicker gate, thedetails on the gate with the lock, with the padlock, great God,merciful God, all that by the window, in the ivy, or switching thelight oﬀ, for instance, then, in her room, the branches, my climb-ing down, or even the priest on the road, and those imaginarylines, those extensions, O God, O God, the suspended bird, Fukstaking oﬀhis shoes, and his interrogating us in the dining room,stupid, stupid, also our departure, the house with Katasia, or the porch and the doors that ﬁrst time, the sweltering heat, andthe fact that Ludwik worked in an oﬃce, or the position of thekitchen in relation to the house, a yellowish pebble, and the keyto the little room, or the frog, what about the frog, where had itbeen mislaid, part of the damaged ceiling, and those ants, there,by the second tree, by the road, and the corner we went be-hind, O God, O God,Kyrie eleison, Christe eleison,there, the tree on the promontory, and that spot behind the cupboard, and myfather, the troubles with my father, the wires of the hot fence,Kyrie eleison . . . Leon lifted a little salt to his mouth on his ﬁnger, placed it on his tongue, stuck out his tongue . . .“ . . . they were forced to keep brushing it away until they”. . .“the regions of the Bystrzyca River”. . .“on the second ﬂoor, actu- ally”. . . a congestion of words like the congestion on the dirtywallpaper . . . on the ceiling . . .He ﬁnished eating and sat with his face fastened to his domedskull . . . that face as if suspended from the skull . . . They probablytalked so much because he was silent. His silence was creating a gap.He pressed the salt with his ﬁnger so that it would stick, and heraised his ﬁnger—watched it—stuck out his tongue—touchedthe ﬁnger with his tongue—closed his mouth—savored it.
Cosmos Venomie was impaling slices of cucumber on a fork. She wasn’tsaying anything.The priest, bent over, with his hands under the table. The cassock.Lena. Sits quietly, meanwhile a phase of minor activities cameupon her, she straightened the napkin, moved a glass, brushedsomething oﬀ, pushed a glass toward Fuks and smiled.Lukie jumped up: “Wham!”Roly-Poly enters, she stood a moment, pudgy, looked at thetable, returned to the kitchen.I’m noting facts. These facts and no others. Why these? I look atthe wall. Little dots, eczema. Something is emerging, like a ﬁgure. No, the ﬁgure disappears, it’s disappeared, there is chaos and dirtyexcess, something about the priest, what’s happening with Fuks,the honey and Venomie, where is Ludwik (because Ludwik wasn’there, he did not come to supper, I thought he was shaving, I wasgoing to ask Lena, but I didn’t ask), what about the mountain folkwho brought us here? Entanglement. What can one know? Sud-denly, boom, it strikes me, just like it did there, outside, outdoors,the terrain with all its variations all the way to the mountains andfarther, beyond the mountains, the highway winding in the night,painful, oppressive, why did I strangle the cat? Why did I stranglethe cat?Leon lifted his eyelids and, though lost in thought, looked at meattentively, straining even—and reached for a glass of wine, raisedit to his mouth.This labor of his, his attention, aﬀected me too. I raised my glassto my mouth. I drank.His eyebrows twitched.I lowered my eyelids.“T o our bachelorhood!”“Y ou monster, how dare you, what
 Witold Gombrowiczbachelorhood is there on a honeymoon!”“Alright, so to our ex-bachelorhood!”“Pour him something, let him drown his sor-rows!”“Lukie, what are you up to!”“Lulu, what are you up to!”His pince-nez glistening under his skull, Leon stretched hisﬁnger, stuck a little salt on it, shoved it into his mouth—kept it inhis mouth.Venomie raised her glass to her mouth.The priest emitted a rather strange, gurgling, sound. He moved.A small window . . . with a latch.I drank.His eyebrows twitched.I lowered my eyelids.“My dear Mr. Leon, why are you so pensive?”“My dear Mr. Leon, what are you thinking?”The Lulus. Then Roly-Poly asked:“Leon, what are you thinking?”She asked this fearfully, standing in the door to the kitchen, herhands by her side, she did not want to hide her terror, she asked asif she were injecting fear into us with a syringe, while I thought, Ithought most deeply, most intensely, but without the slightestthought.Leon commented as an aside: “She’s asking what I’m thinking.”Honey.The tip of his tongue appeared in the groove of his thin lips, histongue was pink, it remained between his lips, the tongue of anolder man in pince-nez, the tongue, spit into the mouth, in thelightning-fast chaos and whirl Lena’s mouth together with Kata-sia’s mouth came to the surface, it was a moment, I saw them onthe very surface, the way one sees pieces of paper in the seethingcauldron of a waterfall . . . it passed.
Cosmos I caught a leg of the table with my hand so that the rapidity ofit all wouldn’t carry me oﬀ. A belated gesture. Rhetorical actually.Humbug.The priest.Roly-Poly nothing. Leon. Lulu said a little tearfully, My dear Mr.Leon, what about this excursion? What for? At night, in the dark?What kind of landscape are we supposed to see?“Y ou can’t see much in the dark,”Fuks interjected impatiently,rather impolitely.“My wife,”Leon said (he’s going to say it, while the bird and thestick are there!), “my wife,”he added (Jesus, Mary!), “my wife”(Icaught myself by the hand!) . . .“Oh please, don’t be so nervosum!”he exclaimed jovially.“There is no reason for this nervipissum! Every little thing is en ordre, bitte,here we are, sitting as God decreed, everyone on hislittle bum, we’re biting into God’s gifts, as well as gurgle gurglegurgle, with schnapps and wine-ho, and within the hour we’llmarch-ho, under my command, to the one and only delight wherethe miracle of the pan-o-ram-a opens up, as I said, because of theprancing moonlit miracle, hop tra-la-la among hills, little moun-tains, mountains, open spaces, valleys, hey-ho, oh, hey-ho . . . as itappeared to me, my dears, twenty and seven years ago, less onemonth and four days when I accidentally at that exact hour of thenight strayed into the one and only place and saw . . .“T o suck,”he added and turned pale. Short of breath.“Clouds are coming,”Lukie said harshly, unpleasantly—“wewon’t be able to see anything, there are clouds, the night will bedark, we won’t see anything.”“Clouds,”Leon mumbled, “clouds . . . That’s good. At that timetoo . . . a bit cloudy. I remember. I noticed it as I was returning. I
 Witold Gombrowiczremember!”he exclaimed impatiently, as if he were in a hurry andwas immediately lost in thought . . .As for me, I also thought . . . unceasingly and with all my might.Roly-Poly (who had since gone to the kitchen) again stood in the door.“Careful, your sleeve!”I jumped sideways at these words of his, frightened—the sleeve,the sleeve!—but he was saying this to Fuks whose sleeve was brush-ing against a dish of mayonnaise. Nothing much. Peace. Why isn’tLudwik here, what’s become of him, why is she without Ludwik?The sparrow.The stick.The cat.“My wife doesn’t trust me.”He looked in turn at three ﬁngers of his right hand, beginningwith the index ﬁnger.“Ladies and gentlemen, my wife would like to know what I’mthinking.”He moved his three ﬁngers in the air, while I instantly inter-twined the ﬁngers of both my hands.“Ladies and gentlemen, perhaps it pains me to some degree,hm, that my wife, after thirty-seven years of unblemished conju-gal life, is anxiously asking for my thoughts.”The priest said,“may I please have some cheese,”everyone lookedat him, he repeated,“may I please have some cheese,”Lukie passedhim the cheese, but instead of cutting himself a piece, the priestadded, “perhaps we can move the table a bit, it’s cramped here.”“We could move the table,”Leon said. “What was I saying,about what? Ah yes, I was saying that I did not deserve, after yearsof conjugal life that was impeccable
Cosmos irreproachableexemplarydutifull o y a l...Because it’s been so many years! Years, months, weeks, days,hours, minutes, seconds . . . Do you know, gentlemen that, pen inhand, I’ve calculated how many seconds of conjugal life I havehad, including leap years, and it came to one hundred and four-teen million, nine hundred and twelve thousand, nine hundredand eighty four, no more no less, until half past seven in theevening of this very day. And now, at eight, a few thousand morehave accrued.”He rose and sang:
If you haven’t got what you loveWhy then you love what you’ve got!
He sat down. Lost himself in thought.“If you want to move the table . . . What was I saying? Aboutwhat? Ah, yes. So many seconds under my wife and daughter’swatchful gaze, and yet, alas, who would have thoughtwho would have thoughtwho would have thoughtwho would have thoughtmy wife seems not to trust my thoughts!”He again became lost in thought, broke oﬀ. His musings were ill-timed, there was a feeling of violent chaos in general, disorder,or something like that, perhaps not just in this speech of his, per-haps it was in everything, in the totality of everything . . . again . . .again . . . while he, on the other hand, was celebrating. The spar-row. The stick. The cat. This is not the point. So this is the point.
 Witold GombrowiczThis is not the point. So this is the point. He was celebrating as ifit were a litany, a religious service, “look with what attention I de-vote myself to inattention . . .“My wife does not trust my thoughts, here, here, do I deservethis? Probably not, let us admit, yet it’s true (move the table away,it’s cramping me too, the seat’s hard but that can’t be helped), yet it’strue, one must admit, in such cases one really doesn’t know, becausewho can really know what thoughts are in someone else’s head . . .Take this example. For example I, an exemplary husband and fa-ther, take into my hand, let’s say, this small piece of an eggshell . . .”He took a piece of shell between his ﬁngers.“And I hold it in my ﬁngers like this . . . and I turn it like this . . .slowly . . . in front of your eyes . . . It’s something innocentharmlessnot in anyone’s way.I n  a  w o r d , a  t r iﬂing passe-temps.Well yes, but the questionarises: how am I turning it? . . . Because in the long run, mark you,I could be turning it innocently, virtuously . . . but, if I please, Icould also . . . what? . . . If I wanted to, I could turn it slightlymore . . . hm . . . What? A little. I’m saying this, of course, as an ex-ample, to show that the most respectable husband possibly could,under the eye of his better half, turn this piece of shell in a man-ner that is . . . ”He blushed. Unbelievable: he turned red! Unheard of! He knewit, he even half-shut his eyes, but he didn’t hide it, indeed, he wassolemnly exposing his embarrassment in full view. Like the mon-strance.He waited until the blush faded. All the while turning the pieceof shell. Finally he opened his eyes and breathed a sigh of relief.He said:
Cosmos “So, whatever.”Everyone relaxed . . . though actually, the congestion in our cor-ner, with the lamps, was still quite jumpy . . . yet at the same timeheavy, it seemed . . . They watched him, they surely thought hewas a bit crazy . . . And yet no one said anything.Outside, somewhere behind the house something clattered, asif something were falling . . . what? It was an extra sound, super-numerary, it absorbed me, I thought about it for a long time,deeply—but I didn’t know what to think, how to think.“Berg.”He said it calmly and politely, carefully.I said no less politely and clearly.“Berg.”He looked at me brieﬂy, lowered his eyelids. We both sat quietly,listening to the word “berg”. . . as if it were a subterranean reptile,one of those that never make their way into the light . . . and now itwas here, in front of everyone. They watched it, I suppose . . . I sud-denly imagined that everything was moving forward, like a deluge,an avalanche, a march under banners, that a de ﬁnitive blow had fallen, a push that gave direction! Slap-bang! March! Onward! Let’smove on! If he were the only one who said “berg,”well, it wouldn’thave been a big deal. But I too said “berg.”And my berg unitingwith his berg (conﬁdential, private) removed his berg from therealm of conﬁdentiality. This was no longer the private little worldof an eccentric. This was truly something . . . this was somethingthat really existed! Right in front of us, here. And it suddenly shotup with full strength, pushed into, made one surrender to it . . .For a moment I saw the sparrow, the stick, the cat, together withthe mouth . . . like trash in the seething cauldron of a waterfall—then vanishing. I expected everything to move forward in the
 Witold Gombrowiczmode of the berg. I was an oﬃcer of the Commander-in-Chief. Aboy serving at mass. A humble and well-disciplined acolyte andperformer. Onward! Let’s move on! March!But then Lulu exclaimed: “Bravo, Mr. Leon!”She had left me out. Yet I was sure that she exclaimed it simplyout of fear, unable to endure cooperating with him. Suddenlyeverything fell apart, then ﬂagged, there was tittering, everyonebegan talking, and Leon laughed uproariously hohohooho, whereis the mommy ﬂaskie, take a leakie, bib the cognac, pootoomubataclee! How unpleasant and discouraging it is that, after such a lofty moment, when the course of events prepares to leap, disin-tegration and laxity ensue, the humming of the swarm returns,of the swarm, give me some vodka too, you’re not drinking, Ma-dame, a drop of cognac, the priest, Venomie, T olek, Lukie, Lulu,Fuks, and Lena with her beautifully sculptured mouth, fresh, abunch of sightseers. Everything slumped. Nothing. Everything be-came like the dirty wall again. Chaos.Sparrow.Stick.Cat.I reminded myself of them because I was in the process of for-getting them. They returned to me because they were departing.Disappearing. Yes indeed, I had to search within for the sparrowand the stick and the cat, already disappearing, to search for themand sustain them within me! And I had to force myself to lookthere again with my thought, into the thicket, beyond the road, bythe wall.The priest began to clamber up from the bench, mumbling ex-cuses, he moved along the table, his cassock crawled onto theroom. He opened the door. He went out on the porch.
Cosmos I, without the berg, felt awkward. I didn’t know, what . . . Ithought: I’ll go out too. T o breathe fresh air.I rose. I took a few steps toward the door.I went out.On the porch—refreshing air. The moon. Clouds gathering,brilliant, luminously-craggy, and below a much darker surge ofmountains, turned into stone while gushing forth. And all arounda fairy-like spectacle, meadows, carpets, lawns swarming withclusters of trees, processions, garden parties, as if this were a parkwhere pageants, parades, games were taking place, everythingdrowned at the very bottom of the moon’s glow.Near the stairs, resting on the handrail, stood the priest.He stood and he was doing something strange with his mouth.
 Witold Gombrowiczchapter 
It will be diﬃcult to continue this story of mine. I don’t even know if it is a story. It is diﬃcult to call this a story, this con-stant . . . clustering and falling apart . . . of elements . . .When I walked out on the porch and saw the priestdoing something strange with his mouth I was stunned! What?What? I was even more stunned than if the earth’s crust hadcracked and larvae came crawling from underground to the sur-face. It’s no joke! I alone knew the secret of the mouth. No one be-sides me had been introduced to the secret aﬀair of Lena’s mouth. He had no right to know it! It was mine! By what right was hesticking his mouth into my secret?!It soon became clear that he was vomiting. He was vomiting.His vomiting, unsightly, wretched, was justiﬁed.He had drunk too much.Well! It’s nothing!He saw me and smiled, mortiﬁed. I wanted to tell him to go liedown and get some sleep, then someone else stepped onto theporch.
Venomie. She walked past me, walked a few steps away and outonto the meadow, stopped, lifted her hand to her mouth and, by thelight of the moon, I saw her vomiting mouth, she was vomiting.She was vomiting. Her mouth, as I saw it, had reason to vomit—which is why I looked—since the priest was vomiting, whyshouldn’t she be vomiting? Yes? Indeed. Good. But. But, but, but,if the priest was vomiting, she should not have been vomiting!This mouth of hers intensiﬁed the priest’s mouth . . . as the hang-ing of the stick had intensiﬁed the hanging of the sparrow———just as the hanging of the cat had intensiﬁed the hanging of thestick—as the banging-into had led to the pounding—just as I hadintensiﬁed the berg with my berg.Why had their vomiting mouths assailed me? What did thesemouths know about the mouth that I was hiding within me?Where did the reptile mouth, slithering, come from? Perhaps itwould be best—to leave. I left. Not into the house, I went acrossthe meadow, enough was enough, the night was poisoned by themoon drifting across it, dead, the tops of trees were in their glory,and there were innumerable groups, processions, gatherings, mur-murings, deliberations, parties—a night truly inducing one todream. Never to return, never to return, I would most willinglynever return, perhaps take the cart, give the horses the whip, leaveforever . . . Well, no . . . A splendid night. In spite of it all, I’m hav-ing fun. A magniﬁcent night. Y et it was impossible to prolong it,I really am sick. A magniﬁcent night. I’m sick, sick, but not all thatsick. The house disappeared behind the hill, I walked on the softgrass alongside the stream, but what about this tree, what kind ofa tree is this, what about this tree . . .I stopped. A stand of trees, and within it one tree was di ﬀerent from the others, that is, actually, it was like the others, but there
 Witold Gombrowiczmust have been a reason why it attracted my attention. This treewas barely visible within the copse, screened by the others, yet itattracted my attention, what, what was it, a thickness, or a weight,a ballast, I was passing it with the feeling of passing a tree that is“too heavy,” terribly “heavy” . . . I stopped, turned back.I walked into the copse, now quite sure that something is there.The copse began with a few scattered birches, and right after thatthere was a concentration of pines, thicker, darker. The sensationof walking toward an oppressive “heaviness” did not leave me.I looked around.A shoe.A leg was hanging down from a pine tree. I thought “a leg,”but I wasn’t sure . . . Another leg. There was a man . . . hanged . . .I looked, a man . . . legs, shoes, higher up I could make out a head,askew, the rest merged into the tree, into the dark branches . . .I looked around, nothing, silence, calm, I looked again. A hang-ing man. The yellow shoe was familiar to me, it reminded me ofLudwik’s shoes. I pushed the branches away, I saw Ludwik’s jacket,and his face. Ludwik.Ludwik.Ludwik, hanging on a belt. His own, pulled from his pants.Ludwik? Ludwik. He was hanging. I took my time getting usedto it . . . He was hanging. I went on getting used to it—he washanging. Since he was hanging, it must have happened somehow,and I slowly began to search my mind, try to ﬁgure it out, he’s hanged, who had hanged him, did he hang himself, when I sawhim just before supper, he was asking me for a razor blade, he wascalm, he was his usual self on our walk . . . and yet he was hang-ing . . . and it happened in the span of just over an hour . . . he washanging . . . and somehow it must have happened, there must
Cosmos have been reasons, but I couldn’t think of them, nothing, nothing,and yet a vortex must have formed in a river ﬂowing by it all, about which I knew nothing, an obstruction must have arisen,some associations, interconnections must have formed . . . Lud-wik! Why Ludwik? Leon more likely, the priest, Venomie maybe,even Lena—but Ludwik! And yet this FACT was hanging, a hang-ing fact, a Ludwik-like fact was hanging, hitting one on the head,a fact that was big, heavy, hanging down, something like a bullroaming about on the loose, an enormous fact on a pine tree, andwith shoes . . .Some time ago a dentist was going to extract my tooth, but hecouldn’t get hold of it with his pliers, I don’t know why they keptslipping oﬀ. . . it was the same with this heavily hanging fact, Icouldn’t get hold of it, it kept slipping away, I was helpless, I hadno access to it, sure, it happened somehow, since it happened . . .I carefully looked around in all directions. I calmed down. Proba-bly because I ﬁnally understood . . .Ludwik.Sparrow.Indeed, I was looking at this hanging man just as I had lookedin those bushes at the sparrow.And pam, pam, pam, pam! One, two, three, four! The hangedsparrow, the hanging stick, the strangled-hanged cat, Ludwikhanged. How neatly it ﬁt together! What consistency! A stupidcorpse was becoming a logical corpse—though the logic was bothheavy-handed . . . and too much my own . . . personal . . . so . . .separate . . . private.I had nothing left but to think. I thought. In spite of everythingI strained to turn it into a readable story and—I thought—whatif he were the one who had hanged the sparrow? He drew the ar-
 Witold Gombrowiczrows, hanged the stick, indulged in these pranks . . . some kind ofmania, the mania of hanging that led him here, to hang him-self . . . what a maniac! I remembered Leon telling me when we saton the tree stump, in all honesty: that he, Leon, had nothing to dowith it. So was it Ludwik? Mania, obsession, lunacy . . .But there was another possibility, also along the lines of normallogic—that he was the victim of blackmail, revenge perhaps,someone persecuting him, someone surrounding him with thosesigns, suggesting the idea of hanging . . . but who then? Someoneat home? Roly-Poly? Leon? Lena? Katasia?Y et another possibility, also “normal”: perhaps he didn’t hanghimself? Perhaps someone murdered him? Perhaps he was stran-gled, then hanged? Someone who was amusing himself by hang-ing odds and ends, a maniac, a lunatic, was ﬁnally seized by the de-sire to hang something heavier than a small stick . . . Who? Leon?Katasia? But Katasia had stayed back there . . . So what? She could havecome here unbeknownst to anyone, for a thousand reasons,by a thousand means, why not, it could have happened, there wereunlimited possibilities of associations and combinations . . . AndFuks? Couldn’tFuks have caught the contagion of hanging, madeit his own . . . and . . . and . . . He could have. Y et he was with usthe whole time. So what? If it turned out that it was he—an inter-val in time could be found, anything can be found in a bottomlesscauldron of evolving events! And the priest? Millions and millionsof threads could connect his ﬁngers with this hanging man . . .They could . . . And what about the mountain men? Where arethe mountain men who brought us here? I smiled in the moon-light at the docile thought of the mind’s helplessness in the face ofoverwhelming, confounding, entangling reality . . . No combina-tion is impossible . . . Any combination is possible . . .
Cosmos Yes, but the threads of connections were fragile . . . fragile . . .and here was this hanging person, a brutal corpse! And its hang-ing brutality, pam, pam, pam, pam, was skillfully uniting withpam, pam, pam, pam, sparrow—stick—cat, it was like a, b, c, d,like one, two, three, four! What skill! What zeal for logic, and yeta subterranean one! Clear evidence, hitting one in the eye, yet sub-terranean.But this subterranean logic, hitting one in the eye, pam, pam,pam, pam, would dissolve and evanesce, as if in a fog (I thought),if one were to submit it to the discipline of ordinary logic. I haddiscussed it with Fuks so many times! Can one speak about a log-ical connection between a sparrow and a stick, united by thebarely visible arrow on the ceiling in our room—so indistinct thatwe had discovered it by pure chance—so indistinct that we actu-ally had to complete it, to ﬁnish drawing it in our imagination?Discovering the arrow, reaching the stick—it was like ﬁnding a needle in a haystack! Who could have—Ludwik or anyone else—constructed a net of such evanescent signs?And what was the connection of the sparrow and the stick withthe cat, since I myselfhad hanged the cat? Pam pam, pam, spar-row, stick, cat, three hangings? True, three, but the third had orig-inated from me, the third rhyme I had set up myself.Chimera. A delusion. Yes!—yet the hanging man hung pam,pam, pam, pam, a, b, c, d, one, two, three, four! I wanted to comecloser and possibly touch him, but I stepped back a bit. Even thisslight movement frightened me, as if moving in the presence of acorpse were something ill-advised and undesirable. The ghastli-ness of my situation—because it was indeed ghastly—lay in thefact that I was here in relation to him exactly in the same way asback there, in relation to the sparrow. Bushes and bushes. A hang-
 Witold Gombrowiczing man and a hanging bird. I looked around . . . What a scene!Mountains thrusting themselves lifelessly into the smooth sheet ofthe sky, arrayed for the greater part with centaurs, swans, ships,lions with luminous manes, and down below a Scheherezade ofmeadows and bouquets enmeshed in trembling whiteness, oh, adead globe, shining with a borrowed light—and this secondary,weakened radiance, nocturnal, was both deﬁling and poisonous, like a sickness. And the constellations of stars were unreal, in-vented, imposed, an obsession of the luminous skies!But it was not the moon that was the central corpse, it was Lud-wik—a corpse on a tree, like a cat carcass on a wall! Pam, pam,pam, pam, pam . . . (magniﬁed by the distant pulsation of thatother night, when the driving-in of needles turned into thepounding with the hammer). I moved as if to leave—but not sofast!—the time for it has not yet come . . .What am I to do? The wisest thing . . . pretend that one hasn’tseen anything, leave the matter to run its own course . . . whyshould I meddle? That’s what I was pondering when the mouthscame to mind. The mouths came to mind rather indistinctly,Lena’s lip smacking mouth, the vomiting mouths, Katasia, Lena,all the mouths, not much, just a bit. Yet they assailed me. I movedmy mouth.I moved my mouth as if repelling them. But I thought with an-noyance of something vague, something like “don’t move yourmouth . . . not here . . .” Really, why should I move my mouth nextto this corpse, moving it next to the corpse is not an ordinarymoving. Scared, I thought I would leave.When I thought of leaving, something I’d been afraid of for thepast minute happened: I thought of looking the corpse in themouth. Maybe it was not this particular thought that frightened
Cosmos me, though I guessed that it could be something of this sort . . . itwas that my wish to tear myself away from the corpse was boundto evoke a wish to accost the corpse.It frightened me, but then it assailed me even more strongly . . .of course . . .However, it would not be so easy—to move away the branches,to turn his face toward the moon, to look. It was even question-able whether I could look unless I climbed the tree. Complicated.And it would be better not to touch anything.I touched, I turned his head, I looked.His lips seemed blackened, his upper lip was greatly pulled up,his teeth were visible: a hole, a cavern. Of course I have been al-ready, and for quite a while, peering into the thought, into the hy-pothesis that perhaps I’ll have to hang . . . either myself, or her.Hanging was peering into me from many sides, and there wereother combinations connected with it . . . often clumsy . . . Afterall, I had already hanged a cat. But a cat is just a cat. While here,and for the ﬁrst time, I was looking human death in the mouth.Into a human mouth-cavern—hanged. Hm.T o leave. Leave it.T o leave. Leave it here, just as it is. It’s none of my business, whathave I got to do with this: I’m not in the least obliged to know howit happened, one takes a little sand into one’s hand and one is al-ready helplessly buried under a heap that is unlimited, immeasur-able, innumerable, impossible to encompass . . . who am I to dis-cover all the connections, perhaps he hanged himself because, e.g.,Lena sometimes sleeps with Leon . . . What can one know, onecan’t know anything, nothing is known . . . I’ll leave and leave it.Yet I didn’t move, and I even thought something like “what a pitythat I looked into his mouth, now I won’t be able to leave.”
 Witold GombrowiczThis thought surprised me on this bright night . . . yet it wasquite warranted: if I were to behave in an ordinary manner in re-lation to the corpse I could have left; but after what I have donewith my mouth and with his mouth . . . I couldn’t just leave. Thatis, I could have left, but I could no longer say that I was not mixedup in this . . . personally . . .I pondered and thought very deeply, tirelessly, yet without asingle thought, and I was now beginning to be scared, truly scared,I was with the corpse, the corpse and I, I and the corpse, I couldnot disentangle myself, really, after looking into his mouth . . .I reached out my hand. I stuck my ﬁnger into his mouth.It was not so easy, his jaws had already stiﬀened somewhat— but they moved apart—I stuck in my ﬁnger, I came upon atongue, unfamiliar and strange, and a palate that was cool andseemed low like the ceiling of a room that is too low, I pulled outmy ﬁn g e r...I wiped my ﬁnger on my handkerchief.I looked around. Has anyone seen me? No. I returned thehanged man to his former position, covered him with branches asbest I could, I wiped away my footprints in the grass, fast, faster,fear, nerves, run away, I worked my way through the copse and,seeing that there was nothing but the stubborn trembling of themoon, I began to walk away, faster, faster, faster! But I did not run.I walked toward the house. I slowed down. What will I tell them?How will I tell them? Now this became the di ﬃcult part. I had not hanged him. I did not hang him, but after my ﬁnger in his mouth the hanged man was also mine . . .And besides, there was the deep satisfaction that ﬁnally “mouths” had become connected with “hanging.” I had connected them! Atlast. As if I had performed my duty.
Cosmos And now one will have to hang Lena.Surprise now followed me at every step, I was truly surprised,because the idea of hanging was for me, thus far, theoretical, op-tional and, even after my ﬁnger in the mouth, the idea of hangingstill did not actually change its character, it remained an eccen-tricity . . . or even a platitude . . . And yet the power with which thehuge hanging man had driven into me, and with which I haddriven into the hanging man, shattered everything. The sparrowwas hanging. The stick was hanging. The cat was hanging (beforethey buried it). Ludwik was hanging. T o hang. I was the hanging.I even stopped walking in order to give some thought to the factthat everyone, after all, wants to be himself, so I too want to bemyself, for example who would love syphilis, of course no oneloves syphilis, but after all, a syphilitic man also wants to be him-self, namely a syphilitic, it is easy to say “I want to be well again,”and yet it sounds strange, as if to say “I don’t want to be who I am.”Sparrow.Stick.Cat.Ludwik.And now one will have to hang Lena.Lena’s mouth.(The priest’s and Venomie’s mouths, vomiting.)Ludwik’s mouth.And now one will have to hang Lena.A strange matter. On the one hand everything has been trivial,evanescent, even unreal, here, far away, beyond hills and dales, bythe light of the moon. On the other hand the strain of the hang-ing and the strain of the mouths was . . . T oo bad. One must.I walked with my hands in my pockets.
 Witold GombrowiczI was on a knoll descending toward the house.Voices, singing . . .I saw the ﬂickering ofﬂashlights on the opposite hill about a mileaway—there they were. They walked under Leon’s command,pumping up their spirits with songs and jokes. There was Lena.From here, from the hill, the landscape lay before me and trem-bled, as if chloroformed. Suddenly locating Lena right there wasjust like walking onto a ﬁeld with a shotgun and spotting a hare inthe distance. So I laughed. I began to walk toward them across theﬁeld. The sparrow is hanging, while I am walking. The stick ishanging, while I am walking. I hanged the cat, and I am walking.Ludwik is hanging, and I am walking.I joined them as they began their descent on a barely visiblepath into a thicket. There were many bushes here and sharpgravel. They proceeded carefully, Leon at the head with a ﬂash- light. They hollered and bantered, “Lead us on, chief!”“Down, in-stead of up?”“The views are down below?”“I’m sitting down! I’mnot going any farther.”“Be ye calm and patient, ta dum, ta dah, how about it, itty-bittyfarther, hey-ho! Soon, soo . . . oon, this way, follow me, my troops,if you please, leave it to me! Salutations!”I walked behind them, they didn’t notice me. She walked a littleto one side, it would not have been diﬃcult to approach her. Icould approach her, of course, in the role of a strangler, a hang-man. It would not have been diﬃcult to pull her aside (because wewere already in love, she was in love with me too, who could haveany doubts, since I wanted to kill her she must have been in lovewith me), and then one could both kill and hang her. I began tounderstand what it is to be a murderer. One murders when mur-dering becomes easy, when one has nothing better to do. Whenother possibilities are simply being exhausted. The sparrow is
Cosmos hanging, the stick is hanging, Ludwik is hanging, I’m hanging herjust as I hanged the cat. I could, of course, not hang her, but . . .why cause such a disappointment? Why upset the apple cart?After so much trouble, so many combinations, hanging emergedin full, and I connected it to mouths—would I ﬂinch now, would I forgo the hanging?Out of the question. I walked behind them. They amused them-selves with the ﬂashlights. We sometimes see this in the movies, ina comedy, a hunter moving slowly with his weapon ready to ﬁre, and on his heels treads a terrible beast, a huge bear, a gigantic go-rilla. It was the priest. He walked right behind me, a little to oneside, he seemed to trail at the very end, not knowing why or whatfor, perhaps he was afraid to stay by himself in the house—at ﬁrst I didn’t notice him, he came straggling up to me—with thosepeasant ﬁngers of his, fumbling. With his cassock. Heaven andhell. Sin. The Holy Catholic Church, Our Mother. The chill of theconfessional. Sin. In saecula saeculorum.Church. The chill of theconfessional. Church and Pope. Sin. Damnation. Cassock. Heavenand hell.Ite missa est.Sin. Virtue. Sin. The chill of the confes-sional.Sequentia sancti . . . Church. Hell. Cassock. Sin . . . Thechill of the confessional.I pushed him hard and he reeled.The moment I pushed him I became scared—what am Idoing?! A quirk, a prank! He’ll raise Cain!But no. My hand encountered such a miserable passivity that Icalmed down right away. He stopped but did not look at me. Westood. I saw his face clearly. And his mouth. I raised my hand, Iwanted to stick my ﬁnger into his mouth. But his teeth wereclenched. I raised his chin with my left hand, opened his mouth,stuck my ﬁnger in.
 Witold GombrowiczI pulled out my ﬁnger and was wiping it on my handkerchief.Now I had to walk faster to catch up with the procession. Stick-ing my ﬁnger into the priest’s mouth did me good, although it’sone thing (I thought) to stick a ﬁnger into a corpse and another todo it to someone living, it was like introducing my phantoms intothe real world. I felt invigorated. I realized that with all this hap-pening I had forgotten for the moment about the sparrow, etc., butnow I was again thinking that about ﬁfteen miles back, the spar-row was there—and the stick was there—and the cat. And alsoKatasia.“Honorable strollers, ladies and gentlemen if you please, herewe’ll restum on this spotum! At ease! Easy breathie for a moment.”He stood under a huge boulder that protruded over a ravine,densely overgrown. In front of the boulder was a small clearing,this place must have been frequented, I thought that I noticedwheel tracks . . . Some dry twigs, grass. “Lukie, I don’t want to behere, what a place he’s found!”“Colonel, sir, there is nothing to siton,” “Mr. President, sir, on the bare ground?”“Alright, alright,” Leon’s voice was plaintive,“it’s just that Daddylost his cuﬄink. The cuﬄink, damnit . . . The cuﬄink. Would someone with a ﬂashlight please come here.”Sparrow.Stick.Cat.Ludwik.Priest.Leon, bent over, was looking for the cuﬄink, Lukie was shininghis ﬂashlight, I remembered Katasia’s little room, Fuks and I shin-ing our ﬂashlights. Oh, so long ago. The little room was backthere. With Katasia. He kept looking for the cu ﬄink,ﬁnally he
Cosmos took the ﬂashlight from Lukie, but after a while I noticed that thelight, instead of keeping to the ground, was surreptitiously sweep-ing over the boulder and other rocks, just like Fuks and I swept thewalls of the little room with our light. Was he looking for a cu ﬀ- link? Maybe not a cuﬄink at all, was this perhaps the place to whichhe’s been leading us, the place of twenty-three years ago?* . . . Buthe was not sure. He could not quite recognize it. Since that timenew trees had grown, the ground had subsided, the boulder couldhave shifted, he was more and more feverishly searching with thatﬂashlight of his, just like we had, at the time, and, seeing him thus,unsure, lost, almost drowning and water rising to his mouth, I hadto think back on how we, Fuks and I, had been lost on ceilings,walls,ﬂower beds. Those were old times! Everyone waited. No onesaid anything, out of curiosity probably, to ﬁnally ﬁnd out what’s squeaking in the grass. I saw Lena. She was delicate, lacy with hermouth stick sparrow cat, Katasia, Ludwik, and priest.He couldn’t ﬁgure it out. He was lost. He was now examiningthe lowest part of the boulder. All was quiet. He straightened up.“It’s here.”Lulu chirped, “What is it that’s here, Mr. Leon, what is it?”Obligingly.He stood modestly, calmly. “What a coincidence . . . Chance, ifyou please, one of a kind! I’m looking for my cu ﬄink, and I see that this rock . . . I’ve been here before . . . Indeed, it was here thatI, twenty-three years ago . . . Here!”Suddenly, as if on order, he was lost in thought, and this dragged
 Witold Gombrowicz*This is not an error. Many people have questioned it and suggest thatany mention of years—i.e., thirty-seven, twenty-seven, twenty-three—may relate to milestones in Gombrowicz’s own life.on. The ﬂashlight went out. It dragged on and dragged on. No oneinterrupted him, not until a few minutes later when Lulu saidsoftly, tenderly, “What happened to you, Mr. Leon?” He replied,“Nothing.”I noticed that Roly-Poly wasn’t here. Had she stayed behind atthe house? What if she had hanged Ludwik? Nonsense. He hangedhimself. Why? As yet, no one knows about it. What will happenwhen they ﬁnd out?Sparrow.Stick.Cat.Ludwik.It was diﬃcult, arduous to realize that what is happening here,now, is in relation to that there, then,ﬁfteen miles back. And I wasmad that Leon was playing ﬁrst ﬁddle, while everyone else (notexcluding myself) became his . . . spectators . . . we were here tos e e...He muttered indistinctly.“Here. With a woman . . . ”Again a few silent minutes, quiet, the long minutes drippedwith swinishness and became a confession, and since no onespoke it meant that we are here for the sole reason of his doing hisbusiness in our presence . . . with his own . . . self-gratifying . . .gratify yourself . . . We waited for him to be done. Time went by.He unexpectedly shone the ﬂashlight on his face. His spectacles,his bald head, mouth, everything. Eyes closed. A voluptuary. Amartyr. He said:“There are no other views.”He switched oﬀthe ﬂashlight. The darkness caught me by sur-prise, it was darker than one would have expected, probably be-
Cosmos cause clouds were already overhead. He was almost invisible bythe boulder. What was he doing? He must have been doing hisown disgusting stuﬀ, exciting himself, recollecting his long-gone,one and only wench, he tried hard, worked at it, celebrated hisswinishness. But . . . but what if he wasn’t sure that it was here?And he was celebrating at random? I was surprised that no one isleaving, surely they have realized by now why he had broughtthem here, to assist him, to watch, to excite him with their watch-ing. It would be so easy to walk away. But no one walked away.Lena, for instance, could have walked away, but she didn’t walkaway. She did not move. He began to breathe hard. He pantedrhythmically. No one could see what he was up to, or how. Butthey did not walk away. He groaned. His groan was sensuous, but,actually, laborious, it was to voluptualize himself. He groaned andyelped. His yelp, muﬄed and throaty, was to help him whore him-self, oh how he labored and how he strained, oh how he piggedhimself, and oh how he celebrated and solemnized . . . He labored.He strained. He breathed hard. He yelped. He’s straining. He’s la-boring. We waited. Then he said:“Berg.”I replied.“Berg.”“Bemberging with bemberg into berg!” he exclaimed, and I ex-claimed: “Bemberging with bemberg into berg!”He calmed down completely and we could hear nothing, I wasthinking sparrow Lena stick Lena cat into the mouth honey liptwirl-up wall clod of dirt scratch ﬁnger Ludwik bushes hangshang mouth Lena alone there kettle cat stick fence road Ludwikpriest wall cat stick sparrow cat Ludwik hangs stick hangs sparrowhangs Ludwik cat I’ll hang————Suddenly it started pouring.
 Witold GombrowiczLoose, dense drops, we lift our heads, it suddenly poured buckets,water came down in sheets, a sudden wind rose, panic, everyonerunning for the nearest tree, but the pines are leaking, dripping,dribbling, water, water, water, wet hair, backs, thighs, and justahead of us in the dark darkness a vertical wall of falling waterinterrupted solely by despairing ﬂashlights, then, in the light ofthe ﬂashlights, one could see it pour, fall, also streams, waterfalls,lakes, it drips, spurts, splashes, lakes, seas, currents of gurglingwater and a bit of straw, stick, leaf carried by water, disappearing,conﬂuence of streams, rivers arising, islands, obstacles, barriersand curlicues, while above from above high up a deluge, it’s pour-ing, it’s falling, while below a leaf rushing by, a disappearing pieceof tree bark, all resulting in shivers, head cold, fever, Lena devel-oped a sore throat, a taxi had to be ordered from Zakopane, sick-ness, doctors, something else entirely, I returned to Warsaw, myparents, war with my father again, various other things, prob-lems, complications, diﬃculties. T oday we had chicken fricasseefor dinner.
Cosmos 